---
title: Resolving Impasses in Therapeutic Relationships by Sue Nathanson Elkind
layout: post
date: '2020-07-23 16:40:41 -0600'
image: /images/posts/ResolvingImpasses.jpg
published: true
---
>She loathes having critical thoughts about Dr. K., who is clearly trying hard to be helpful, but her doubts and criticisms will not go away.

>Lynn begins to imagine that Dr. K. is afraid of the intensity of her feelings and wants her either to mute her feelings or to go away. She finds herself leaving every session feeling worse than when she arrived. Eventually she comes to dread the appointments altogether. She knows that she will leave his office shouldering not only the same grief, guilt, and self-hatred with which she came in, but also the additional weight of her disillusionment and disappointment in Dr. K. for his inability to offer her the help she needs. 64

>She is worried that she might defeat Dr. K., knowing that defeating him will mean a larger loss for her. 67

>Her sense of her destructive power in relationships is tragically reaffirmed. 70

>As the quotation from John Klauber suggests, therapists are vulnerable to experiencing intense feelings toward their patients—3. factor that can contribute to therapeutic impasses. 72

>Lynn worked to forge a special bond with Dr. K., in part because of a reactivated yearning for an unattainable bond with her father. Her efforts were expressed in her empathy and concern for him and in adopting his interests (Shakespeare and psychotherapy) as her own. Her efforts met an acute and equally unconscious need in Dr. K. for a soul mate, a kindred spirit, a kind of intellectual companion. Dr. K. came to rely upon her for the intimacy she could provide and unknowingly abandoned his stance as her therapist. If he had not done so, he might have been able to reflect on both his needs in relation to her and her yearnings and wishes in relation to him. Like Dr. K., therapists are at risk of relying unconsciously on certain patients to meet personal needs. Like Lynn, many patients yearn to experience a special intimacy with their therapists. 72

>Patients' automatic efforts to protect their therapists by disavowing perceptions of the therapists' vulnerabilities constitute another potential source of impasses. As the quotation from Lewis Aron indicates, patients accommodate to the interpersonal reality of their therapist, accurately sensing their therapist's feelings and attitudes toward them. But when they intuit that these feelings and attitudes are related to areas of vulnerability in the therapist, they often hold themselves back from talking explicitly about what they perceive. Lynn sensed but disavowed her perception of Dr. K.'s need to be enlivened by her interest in him, to receive her compassion in the face of his shame and guilt, and to avoid intense affects and conflict in the relationship. 72

>Fearful of the destructive power of her critical, angry feelings, Lynn created him, albeit unconsciously, into the helpful therapist she needed him to be. She had protected herself in her family of origin by disavowing her feelings of anger in order to protect herself from feeling like a bad, unloving person and to provide herself with a loving family. Like Lynn and Dr. K., patients' tendency to disavow the perceived limitations of their therapists may mesh harmoniously with the therapists' need to preserve a particular sense of self. Like Lynn, who was unaware of her core sense of being bad and destructive, patients are often unable to "see through" their own defenses to the vulnerable core the defenses protect. Their defenses can effectively hide the vulnerable core from their therapists as well. 73

>For example. Dr. K. had difficulty asking himself how he might be contributing to the stalemate in the therapeutic relationship because of the psychological disequilibrium that such questions would have caused. If Dr. K. had asked himself, for example, why he was giving Lynn articles on Shakespeare and psychotherapy rather than asking her what her wish to share his interests might mean, he might have uncovered his unmet needs for a soul mate. He might then have confronted his reluctance to seek consultation or psychotherapy. Had he done so, a range of disavowed feelings about himself might have been consciously available to him rather than defended against in ways that limited and derailed the therapy. 73

>First, Dr. K. did not make explicit connections between Lynn's early history and the kinds of interactions that occurred in therapy. Thinking through these links, regardless of whether or not he shared his ideas with Lynn, would have helped him adopt a reflective stance toward her. Without a mutually created conceptual narrative to provide a platform from which both Dr. K. and Lynn could look at and explore her mode of relating to him, Lynn could only continue attempting to influence their relationship through familiar relational modes. Dr. K., like a boat without a rudder in stormy seas, could only react to Lynn without conscious reflection and an orientation to guide him. A conceptual formulation was essential because of the function it would have served in protecting Lynn and Dr. K. from being lost together in their jointly created relational mode, not because it would have constituted a statement of objective truth about their therapeutic relationship. 74

>She experienced herself as "bad" when she spoke out, precipitated conflict, felt angry or complained, or could not control fluctuations in her mood. She experienced herself as "good" when she was compliant, attentive to the needs of others, and demonstrated competence in taking care of herself. 76

>My research and clinical experience indicate that patients who are left feeling harmed by a therapeutic relationship that terminated abruptly in a painful impasse are in most cases patients who have been wounded in an area of primary vulnerability. The wounding, instead of being contained and worked with in the relationship, has brought about a rupture and a particularly painful termination. 90

>The opportunity for Ann to learn how to remain connected to others when she is angry or frightened passes by. 94

>She has no way of knowing that the opportunity to learn to remain in relationship to another person through the vicissitudes of their fluctuating states of being has been missed. 96

>Balint accurately describes the experience of a patient in the realm of the basic fault or primary vulnerability when he writes that these patients are exquisitely sensitive to their therapists' mood. If the therapist is not in tune with the patient, the patient, dependent and in need of harmony in order to preserve the coherence and connection of self, reacts with anxiety, aggression, or despair. Adult language can be useless or misleading at this level, because words do not always have an agreed-upon, conventional meaning. At the level of the basic fault, every gesture of the therapist, let alone her words, matters enormously. The therapist is either loved or feared by the patient/ infant. The patient named Lori, who was unable to make use of Dr. R. until a shift occurred in the relationship (see Chapter Two), may be said to have reached the level of her basic fault in her therapy. 114

>Balint asserts that the therapist can bridge the gulf to the patient and prevent a regression from becoming malignant by understanding what the patient needs and conveying the understanding to the patient, not through interpretations, but by creating an atmosphere of respect and tolerance. The therapist must accept all complaints and resentments as real and valid, even if the therapist has a different view, in order to allow time for the patient's resentments to shift to regret. Balint believes that interpretations will only impede this process. The therapist may need to tolerate long periods of violent (verbal) aggressiveness, followed by mourning and regret, not only about the therapist's present failures but about the original caretakers' failures and losses. Although the mourning process may last an exasperating length of time from the therapist's point of view, it must be witnessed in full. The mourning must occur in the framework of a two-person relationship. Only then can the patient reassess her position and reexamine the possibility of accepting the often-indifferent universe. 115

>In his final article "Fear of Breakdown," which was published posthumously in 1971, Winnicott refined his conception of unthinkable anxieties. Because he felt that "anxiety" was too weak a word, he referred instead to "primary agonies" that each of us must defend against. He believed that an adult's fear of an impending breakdown is actually a fear of returning to a state of primary agony that she has already lived through as an infant, before the development of the cognitive capacities necessary to remember it. 120

>danger of fragmentation, if the other person neglected or abandoned her, was too great to risk. When she did feel safe enough with Dr. L. to trust him, he failed her and then was unavailable to "hold" her (remain psychologically connected and available) through the experience of anxiety and fragmentation that ensued. Had Dr. L. insisted that Ann remain in relationship to him, especially in view of the injury that his fee raise brought about, Ann would have had an important opportunity. She might have lived through a "breakdown" experience—the injury of Dr. L.'s fee raise, the experience of his utter abandonment, her rage and disappointment—with full adult consciousness and without the loss of the important attachment/ connection to him. In Winnicott's words, she would have re experienced a fragmentation that first occurred in relation to her parents when she was not enough of a person (not cognitively developed enough) to live through it. As an adult in a therapeutic relationship, the fragmentation would take place when there was a "person" (ego) there to experience it. Instead, Ann lived through the breakdown once again, reenacting a traumatic disconnection from an important attachment figure. Ann's subjective sense of having been damaged by the relationship with Dr. L. was partially accurate, because the likelihood that she will risk another therapeutic relationship after the rupture with Dr. L. is diminished. The residue of his abandonment remains with her. 120

 >A therapeutic relationship, by re-creating in form the exclusive dyad of mothers and infants, encourages patients to experience, often unconsciously, yearnings that cannot always be adequately met for therapists to protect them from impingements, to provide essential care, and to be empathically attuned to them. Therapists, like mothers, are in danger of being increasingly idealized as the conditions under which they function become more difficult. 123

>Traces, or the "shadow" of the early transformational object that the mother once was for the infant, remain visible in the behavior, thoughts, and feelings of the adult patient in relation to the therapist and in the corresponding feelings engendered in the therapist while being with the patient. Bollas provides the example of a patient named Peter who was helped not by the content of Bollas' s. interpretations but by the sound of his voice in uttering them: what he wanted was to hear my voice, which I gradually understood to be his need for a good sound. My interpretations were appreciated less for their content, and more for their function as structuring experiences. He rarely recalled the content of an interpretation. What he appreciated was the sense of relief brought to him through my voice. 127

>When Dr. L. unexpectedly raised his fee just before his vacation, he suddenly loomed large in Ann's subjective view as an adult person, separate from Ann, jolting her out of the safe cocoon of his secure maternal presence. She reacted to the sudden change in nonverbal aspects of his demeanor (e.g., the alteration from his calm, quiet voice to a harsh, impersonal tone) as much as to the content of what he said. The sudden absence of his presence as a familiar transformational object was more than Ann could tolerate. She could not withstand being catapulted into a state of primary vulnerability and then being left alone there as a consequence of the sudden change in him. Without his help in identifying and affirming the change that had occurred, Ann withdrew from the relationship altogether in order to restore a coherent sense of herself as a separate, adult person. 128

>Dr. L., suffering from his personal primary vulnerabilities centered in feelings of envy, deprivation, and loss, was unable to continue to function as the maternal presence buffering Ann from the intrusion of anxieties from the outer or inner world. Unfortunately he was not sufficiently aware of his own state of vulnerability either to manage it on his own or to convey it to Ann so that she might have understood his behavior in conceptual terms. An acknowledgment of and way of thinking about what had occurred in the relationship would have allowed Ann to experience the loss of Dr. L. while in relationship to him instead of alone without him. Moving through a painful experience in the context of an ongoing relationship with a therapist is worlds away from moving through it without the relational tie. A consultant can serve this function for a patient when the therapist is unavailable, as the chapters in Part III demonstrate. Patients are able to tolerate profound shifts in the transference matrix of the therapeutic relation- ship as long as the therapist remains in relationship to them and can acknowledge the nature of the shifts. But Dr. L. was caught in his own vulnerabilities and in his needs for Ann to remain available to him. Allowing Ann to terminate as his patient enabled him to reduce his ongoing exposure to the sense of loss, deprivation, and envy that she elicited in him.

>Had Dr. L. been able to remain in relationship to Ann and her experience, as well as to convey to her something about his vulnerable state and the way his anxieties were interacting with hers to produce an impasse, the therapeutic relationship might have been preserved. However, the relationship would have been permanently altered, and the permanence of the alteration would need to he explicitly acknowledged. Therapists may resist relinquishing the gratification inherent in functioning as a positive maternal caretaker and consequently may have difficulty acknowledging with the patient that a permanent change in the therapeutic relationship has occurred. Patients generally welcome their therapists' acknowledgment of a permanent change. Even when vulnerable facets of a patient's self are activated in the maternal-infant transference matrix of a therapeutic relationship, the adult part of the patient's self continues to exist and can be called on when necessary.

>A therapist who understands conceptually the patient's experience of collapsing into the autistic-contiguous position as a consequence of a threat to the patient's sense of self, as wounding in the realm of primary vulnerability is, may be better able to tolerate sitting with a patient who is in a state of fragmentation. The therapist has access to a conceptual language that provides an anchor and helps the patient restore a stable sense of self. 131

>In the depressive mode, which is less primitive and developmentally more complex than the other two modes, individuals have the capacity to experience others as whole beings, as both subjects and objects. Others are perceived as separate human beings who have a life of their own, and not only as objects that are under one's omnipotent, magical control. In this mode of organizing experience, a new anxiety arises: "that one's anger has driven away or harmed the person one loves.Patients operating from the depressive position will have difficulty expressing angry and critical feelings toward their therapists, fearful that the expression of anger will alienate the therapist or cause the therapist to forget that the patient also has good feelings for them. Patients who are catapulted into states of intense rage, like patients wounded by therapists in an area of primary vulnerability, do cause therapists to forget that they are also attached in positive ways. When therapists are unable to hold onto the importance of the attachment, they make their patients' worst fear become a reality: The patients' anger does drive away or harm the therapist and endangers the relationship. 132

>The dynamics of the patient are focused on. But impasses, particularly those in which wounding has occurred in the patient's realm of primary vulnerability, often involve the vulnerabilities of both patient and therapist. Understanding the interaction of the vulnerabilities of both patient and therapist is critically important if the wounding is to be worked through rather than allowed to disrupt the relationship altogether. 133

>Awareness of the extent to which they were buffered in infancy from primordial anxiety by their mother-person helps patients and therapists create a conceptual frame for understanding the patients' (and mothering persons') primary vulnerabilities. With such a conceptual frame, patients (and therapists) learn to tolerate a broader range of self-states without fear of a permanent loss of cohesion and connection of self. Therapy with patients who seek an understanding of their early issues usually includes the creation (and re-creation) of a narrative history that encompasses the mother-infant relationship. The narrative history is created not only from memories, fantasies, and perceptions of early experiences conveyed by patients, but from the verbal and nonverbal relational experiences that patients and therapists live through with each other and reflect upon together. 134

>Similarly, therapists and patients often experience rare and special moments of connection. The yearning to know others and to be known intimately the wish for mutual recognition—can be reawakened, along with the resistances that accompany it, in a therapeutic relationship. 151

>When mother and baby, or therapist and patient, function in harmonious or complementary ways as needed relational partners for each other, the coherence and connectedness of their separate selves are preserved, a balance between separation and relatedness is maintained, and the individuals involved are protected from collapsing into a realm of primary vulnerability. But if a baby has repeated experiences of being unable to find in the mothering person a needed developmental, coerced, or subjective relational partner and/or is repeatedly required to function primarily as a relational partner for significant caretakers, areas of vulnerability can arise. For example, when a mother uses her baby as a coerced relational partner by repeatedly flying into a rage and withdrawing at any expression of separateness on the part of the baby, the baby may respond by remaining dependent rather than risk the loss of the mother as a needed attachment figure. The baby keeps the mother in place as a coerced relational partner by suppressing needs and remaining dependent, and the mother keeps the baby in place as a coerced relational partner who functions to preserve the mother's sense of self.

>To foreshadow the ensuing discussion of therapeutic relation- ships, we can speculate about what might happen were this baby to become a therapy patient as an adult. We can surmise that the baby who is now grown will need to risk the imagined loss of the therapist by asserting her independent needs. If the therapist is relying on the patient as a coerced relational partner to be a "good" patient, uncomplaining and cooperative, the patient is in jeopardy of being re-traumatized should she risk being difficult. If the therapist is able to recognize the subjective meaning and importance of the patient's behavior and consequently can function as a developmental relational partner for the patient, the therapist will tolerate and receive the patient's difficult behavior. The patient will then have a new experience of self and other. 152

>Patients and therapists, relying on a variety of capacities for processing information that includes feeling and intuition as well as thinking, must work to identify them as they emerge in the interactions that occur non verbally. Patients behave in relationship to therapists in accordance with well-established interaction patterns, which they must eventually relinquish in the service of modifying them.

>As the process of relinquishing familiar modes of behavior occurs, the therapist has in the present the same powerful effect as the mothering person had in the past in influencing the establishment of new representations of self and other. The therapist, in light of the power and authority invested in her through the patient's trust in allowing vulnerabilities to surface, thus has at once an unusual opportunity to facilitate positive change, an enormous responsibility for the well-being of her patient (just as a mother has for her infant), as well as an unavoidable possibility of causing harm. The latter possibility, once it is openly acknowledged, can be mitigated with an awareness of the concepts that have been discussed.

>For therapy to be effective at the deepest level, patients need to find the various paths of access to their areas of primary vulnerability. A secure therapeutic relationship in which a patient feels unconditional positive regard from the therapist, a strong alliance and sense of trust can facilitate the emergence of areas of vulnerability. Ironically, being wounded by the therapist also evokes the personal vulnerability of the patient. An experience of wounding provides the catalyst patient and therapist may use to go beyond cognitive understanding of and insight into the realm of primary vulnerability. The experience of living through the vulnerability enables transformative change to occur.

>To work with patients who fall into the treacherous territory of the realm of primary vulnerability, therapists need to be able to tolerate being, or being perceived as, a source of either safety or wounding. Theirs is the challenge of bearing the difficulties that either role entails and of trying not to mitigate the degree of wounding or rush to heal it, but to bear witness to it, as Balint emphasized in his discussion of the basic fault. If they are regarded as the source of wounding, they must hear responsibility long enough for the patient to reach a state of being able to locate that source more diffusely, at first in the complex interaction of self, other, and self-in-relation, and then as an inherent part of the human condition. At the same time, therapists have the task of carrying the hope, temporarily unavailable to the floundering patient, that the anxiety related to the primary vulnerability will eventually be channeled constructively and creatively.

>Because our sense of self and of self-in-relationship first arises within the context of human relationships, we seek an understanding of them within the context of a human relationship. Because anxiety related to primary vulnerabilities also arises in the context of a human relationship, we seek the capacity to bear it in that context. Individuals will thus continue to seek therapy, despite the difficulties inherent in a pioneering and continually evolving field. The unique structure of the therapeutic relationship, in which one individual devotes concentrated attention to another in the inviolable physical setting and temporal space of the hour enables issues in the realm of primary vulnerability to surface with special intensity. The hope for under- standing and healing that is awakened in a working therapeutic relationship provides fertile ground for disappointment and failure as well as for positive change.

>When therapeutic relationships end in disappointment with a sense of failure, patients have the task of managing a mixture of intense and difficult feelings. These affect states, described in Chapter Eleven, arise from the rupture of the vitally important attachment bond that therapy patients form to their therapists. Its significance parallels in importance the attachment bond that infants form to their caretakers. But because the attachment bond is often obscured by the distressed behaviors of patients and therapists who are caught in impasses, it is often overlooked. The following chapter highlights the importance of the attachment bond, returning it to a central place in the therapeutic relationship. 174

>Attachment bond formed by adult patients in therapy to their therapists can become as central to them as the attachment bond formed by infants to their primary carepersons. The attachment bond, like Winnicott's "environment mother," operates invisibly, at best enabling patients and therapists to take the risk of including formerly split-off, hidden, or nascent and undeveloped aspects of self in the relationship, and at worst causing acute states of panic and anxiety when the durability and continuity of the attachment bond are put at risk by an impasse. 178

>Through new tributaries from the river of the therapeutic relationship, they hope to carve different patterns on the shape of their sense of self. Only in a secure attachment will these new and more flexible modes of self-representation and being-in-relation- ship evolve.

>Unless a strong attachment bond forms between patient and therapist, therapy that engages the areas of primary vulnerability formed by faulty or destructive self-representations and inflexible or coerced modes of relating cannot take place. When therapist and patient are mismatched, formation of an essential attachment bond is blocked. When collusions occur, patients and therapists are stuck in an entrenched mode of relating because of their fear of disrupting the attachment bond. Primary vulnerabilities are shaped around the necessity of preserving an essential attachment bond, such as that between mothers and infants. When patients and therapists are catapulted into areas of primary vulnerability, the attachment bond between them is inevitably put in jeopardy.

>The attachment to a therapist, like an infant's attachment to the mother, represents not only an outer but an inner attachment: Both mothers and therapists serve as mediators for the infants' and patients' connection to their feelings, thoughts, and reactions to experience. The dual nature of the attachment bond—as a connection both to one's self and to the other—underscores its importance. 179

>A feature of attachment behavior of the greatest importance clinically, and present irrespective of the age of the individual concerned, is the intensity of the emotion that accompanies it, the kind of emotion aroused depending on how the relationship between the individual attached and the attachment figure is faring. If it goes well, there is a joy and a sense of security. If it is threatened, there is jealousy, anxiety, and anger. If broken, there is grief and depression. Finally there is strong evidence that how attachment behavior comes to be organized within an individual turns in high degree on the kinds of experience he has in his family of origin, or if he is lucky, out of it. 180

>Patients who are in a state of impasse with a therapist to whom they had once felt securely attached are likely to experience acute separation anxiety, bearing in mind that the separation refers not only to separation from a person in the outer world, but also from a connection to a part of the self the therapist mediates for the patient. Therapists mediate the patients' connection to themselves by holding for them a vision of their potential and a sense of their coherence and complexity 182

>Therapeutic relationships, according to this model and as emphasized in preceding chapters, thus provide both a danger and an opportunity. The danger resides in the potential for patients to be wounded or traumatized by their therapist in ways that are similar to prior experiences with their parents. If the dangerous outcome occurs, patients are as vulnerable as they were in childhood because as adults they have risked hoping to have a healing, reparative, and insight- oriented experience in therapy and they have assumed, with reason, that their therapist would be different from their parents.

>A patient in therapy, in addition to having the possibility of a new experience of attachment, also has an opportunity to allow entrenched representational models of self, other, and self-in-relationship and familiar modes of relating—for example, as subjective, coerced, or developmental objects—that operate outside of awareness to emerge into consciousness. Once in consciousness, the modes of relating and representations of relationships can be identified and evaluated by patient and therapist in terms of their origin and their necessity in the individual's present life context. Therapeutic relationships that provide positive caretaking responses that were not available to the patient as a child open up the possibility of a new sense of security, and, consequently, provide infinite opportunities for new exploratory behavior in the patient's inner and outer world. 184

>The first level of wounding consists of the behavior or interaction that wounds the patient such that the primary vulnerabilities that originated in the context of significant attachments are activated. The wounded patient attempts simultaneously to express her feelings about the wound and at the same time to preserve the relationship to the therapist, who has now become as potentially dangerous as prior attachment figures. The excruciating dilemma the patient faces—being wounded in areas of primary vulnerability in relationship to a significant attachment figure whom she hoped would be different from the original attachment figures with whom the vulnerabilities were formed—often leads the patient to lash out at the therapist in anxiety, grief, and anger.

>A second level of wounding can then be created, often unwittingly, by the therapist's problematic responses to the patient, who is now behaving in markedly upsetting ways. The therapist, thrown off center by the feelings and behavior of the patient, reacts to preserve her sense of a competent therapist-self. The therapist's problematic responses thus compound the first level of wounding and also prevent the patient from working psychologically with the nature of the primary wound. More importantly, the second level of wounding not only puts the relationship at risk but may be powerful enough to sever it. 186

>When a patient reacts to the therapist's wounding behavior by expressing feelings of disappointment, criticism, or anger, as Ann did, the therapist, like Dr. L., may be unable to accept, receive, or welcome the patient's distressed feelings. Therapists may be unable to empathize with patients' responses to their behavior and to recognize these responses as legitimate from the patients' perspective, however unjustified the therapists may perceive them to be. Therapists may also be unable to place the responses in the context of their patients' personal areas of primary vulnerability and to help them examine their reactions in relation to early experiences with their first caretakers. Instead of accepting their patients' needs and feelings as comprehensible both in the current therapeutic relationship and in the context of significant past relationships, therapists may fend off negative feelings and remain focused primarily on their own needs in relation to the patient. Allowing the therapeutic relationship to end at this pivotal juncture, as Dr. L. did, without as full a conscious understanding as possible of the primary vulnerabilities that are engaged, adds a devastating abandonment—the rupture of an essential attachment bond—to the original and secondary level of wounding. 187

>When psychological energy is directed toward preserving a stable self-state, the therapist is often unable to focus on understanding, attuning to, and empathizing with her patient. Consequently, a crucial underpinning of the patient's responses to the wounding the therapist provokes is overlooked: The patient is desperately trying to stay in relationship to the therapist and to restore the connection to the therapist that the original wounding has imperiled, even when the patient's destructive impulses have been unleashed and are being directed at the therapist or the relationship. Because the patient may be expressing anger and anxiety in destructive ways, her underlying wish to restore and maintain the critically important relationship to her therapist may be overlooked by a therapist who is preoccupied with preserving her self-state. Consultation in separate meetings with the patient and therapist at this pivotal juncture often effect an immediate and dramatic change by helping the therapist see how attached the patient is and by helping the patient see how hard the therapist is trying to restore a stable sense of a professional self. Because a consultant looks at the impasse from a different perspective, she is often able to perceive the context of the wounding, and its origins in the patient's history. Consequently she can help both the patient and therapist recognize the opportunity that resides in the painful interaction. (See the case of Josie and Dr. M. in Chapters Two and Thirteen.) 188

>Another response that patients experience as harmful occurs when therapists defensively distance themselves for protection from the anxiety generated by the threatened attachment, either by retreating into silence or by not being present emotionally to respond empathically to feelings the patient is attempting to express. Dr. K. withdrew from his patient Lynn when she went into a crisis of anguish after her younger sister Alice was injured in an automobile accident. Dr. K. was alarmed by the sudden change in his patient and how out of control she seemed to be. Fear that he could not calm her down, that she was out of control, obscured for Dr. K. the opportunity carried in her new state of being. Lynn had always been compelled to control her emotions in order not to burden her parents, whom she accurately perceived to be overwhelmed by their financial responsibilities and their worry about Alice. For the first time in her therapy, Lynn had the opportunity to yield to her feelings in relation to Dr. K. and to be held symbolically by her therapist's presence. Dr. K.'s inability to withstand her anguish created a re traumatizing experience for Lynn instead of a healing opportunity. 189

>Even therapists who are willing to participate in flexible, empowering relationships are affected by the limitations of life and of being merely human. No human being can completely satisfy the legitimate needs of another. 194

>Therapists may be alarmed by the intense affect states that patients display in response to wounding or to the threat of loss of the therapist. 195

>The loss takes on even greater significance when we recognize that most patients seek therapy because they have experienced unsatisfactory attachments to their original caretakers, usually the parents. They are taking a risk in trying once again, going against the grain of their actual experience, to establish an enduring attachment, to provide themselves with an essential, secure relational base from which they can face the primary vulnerabilities that are the legacy of their early attachments. 196

>When a failure then occurs, patients are thrown back into a state of despair that is actually worse than the state in which they began therapy. 197

>Often patients resist attempting another therapeutic relationship because they believe that if they stay in any relationship long enough, their unlovable core will eventually be exposed and will drive even the most stalwart therapist away. These feelings are most difficult for patients who were abandoned in similar ways in early childhood. One patient described her thoughts:

>I've exposed the insatiably hungry me, the vulnerable and dependent me, the rageful scalding-hot me, the lonely and abandoned me, the worthless and rejected me, the selfish and entitled me, the engulfing and devouring me, the despairing me who is unable to bear being alive and is afraid to die, the me that dares once more to love. And I've been pushed away as intolerable, as I will be if I dare to expose these "me's" ever again to anyone else. 200

>The incompleteness of the ending process in painful terminations can also augment the sense of damage with which patients are left. When patients and therapists are able to experience an ending phase in which the readiness to terminate arises organically, both of them have time to assess what was and was not accomplished within the therapy. Patients and therapists are able to separate psychologically from each other gradually. But when terminations are abrupt and painful, patients may feel as if parts of themselves were literally left behind in their therapists' offices. Not only do they feel that their most vulnerable and shameful aspects were exposed and magnified, but that valuable capacities were left behind: the capacity to be open, trusting, hopeful. Patients are left to handle the process of reclaiming these facets of themselves on their own. The reclamation process, like the separation process, may take a long time. 202

>the therapeutic relationship ruptures when men have dared to be vulnerable, the men are at risk of being left with a sense of having been harmed and of being defective as men. 206

>When the relationship has ruptured, patients who risk seeking consultation want help in understanding what went awry, holding onto the valuable aspects of the relationship, and mourning its loss. 214

>Because patients who feel misunderstood or wounded by therapists are also attached to them, they often wish to protect the therapists even at the cost of blaming themselves. A pervasive sense of shame and failure often leads patients to take primary responsibility for the problem in the therapeutic relationship even though they may accurately perceive the therapist's contribution. 224

>To patients, therapists are not ordinary people. Therapists have extraordinary power, just as parents have in relation to their children. The events that transpired in the therapy may sound rather ordinary to others, but to the patients seemingly commonplace interactions can have devastating impact. When patients attempt to describe the interactions that led to an impasse or wounding, they put themselves in jeopardy of being misunderstood and injured once again. This pattern, of patients being wounded and then having their reactions to the injury misunderstood, often repeats earlier experiences with significant attachment figures. 224

>Many patients, even when they feel injured by their therapists, do not want to tarnish their therapists' image and reputation. They worry that disclosing the vulnerabilities and limitations of the therapists might be as injurious to the therapists as what the therapists have done to them. For other patients, empowering themselves to disclose the name of their therapists can be an important positive step. 224

>Patients who are wounded, especially when the therapist defensively minimizes the nature of the wounding, are often plunged into an abyss of confusion and despair from which they may have difficulty extricating themselves. 251

>The relationship that they had hoped would help them recover from past traumatic disillusionment has suddenly and unexpectedly repeated the past trauma and then failed to relieve the patient's distress. From the patients' perspective, therapists abruptly shift from being positive developmental objects to being dangerous ones. 252

>Sometimes an experience of wounding is powerful enough to overload the therapeutic relationship, destroying needed illusions prematurely to such an extent that the patient cannot recover enough of them to continue. The patient experiences a loss of energy and enthusiasm for the therapy that cannot be restored, while the therapist is left feeling frustrated and helpless.

>Pregnancy of a female therapist provides one example of a life change that can be too wounding for some patients to tolerate, raising in unmanageable degree the issues of envy, abandonment, fears of destroying the therapist and the baby and of being destroyed (hated), and the reality of the separateness of patient and therapist. 262

>What's hardest for me is to accept, even three years after the therapy ended, is the fact that I'll never have a shared resolution with my therapist. I can only have the peace that I can make with it. And I still haven't recovered the lost ground from the rupture. I haven't been able to make a good connection to another therapist and I'm still cynical about the profession. It's ironic that the primary vulnerability, to use your term for it, that I came to the therapist for help with—the ways I was shaped in my family to expect that my feelings wouldn't be acknowledged—is also what kept me in the therapy getting hurt over and over. 269

>Losses of any kind, openly acknowledged and mourned, are bearable. But losses that must remain hidden and grieved for in isolation remain an ongoing source of anguish. 286
