---
title: Into the Darkest Places by Marcus West
layout: post
date: '2020-07-23 16:40:41 -0600'
image: /images/posts/IntoTheDarkestPlaces.jpg
published: true
---
>The individual in whom borderline states of mind predominate has typically experienced a profound, early relational trauma that cannot be simply “got over”. Such traumatic experience sets the person at odds with themselves and the world. The experience occurring early in life, for example, of being unloved or unwanted, of being disliked or hated, or of being deprived, ignored, or abused, powerfully disrupts and comes to dominate the individual’s personality. This experience, which they cannot bear, is set at the heart of their identity and is installed in implicit/procedural memory as one of the individual’s key internal working models (Bowlby, 1969).

>Furthermore, being foundational to their identity, they feel that they cannot possibly change, so that they feel, over time, trapped, condemned, despairing, and hopeless.

>If, for example, the analyst asks the patient to wait in the waiting room before the start of the session time, or does not answer personal questions, or leaves too much or too many silences, they may be experienced as cold, uncaring, withholding, cruel, or sadistic if this experience happens to be associated with the person’s early experience of the caregivers’ unavailability in some way (rather than being seen “simply” as professional and clear-boundaried, as it might be experienced by someone who has not had that early experience and whose ego-functioning has not been disrupted). Such views will be held with utter conviction as the patient deeply experiences the analyst in this way.

>These events—being kept waiting in the waiting room, silences, or not answering personal questions—can become the continual salt in the patient’s wounds, with the patient insisting that the analyst recognise the agony and distress to which they are subjecting them. This can run to the analyst being persuaded or cajoled into making allowances in terms of waiting or silences, or trying to “prove” that they do care, that they are a feeling human being, and that they are not simply “following the rules” (discussed in full in Chapter Eleven.

>For the individual with a borderline psychology, however, their ego has incorporated these experiences into their sense of themselves, partly in order to allow them to anticipate what will happen and accommodate themselves to their traumatic circumstances. Often, these early experiences come to form core beliefs, such as, “I am too much for other people”, “People do not like me” (Ogden, Minton, & Pain, 2006, p. 3) and even, “There is nothing to like, I am not a person”. As time unfolds a second order of beliefs develop: “No one would like someone as negative and hopeless as me”, or “It is my fate to be like this”.

>The person cannot bear to be who they deeply experience themselves to be, yet they cannot manage successfully, in the long-term, to be anything else. As a result they feel flawed, wrong, cursed (Balint describes this as the “basic fault”).

>The person whose ego-functioning has been disrupted in this way will inevitably feel ill-adapted to the world. They can see that in order to “get on” you need to have confidence in yourself and be able to reach out positively towards others, but they just cannot congruently do so. In addition therefore, they feel a failure, bad and “no good”. These experiences are confirmed with each new interaction. As I have said already, they may very likely experience a deep, agonising envy of others who (appear to) thrive, which further confirms their sense that they are bad.

>The person comes to feel bad that the kindly reassurance (if it comes at all) does not really help, and they feel like a colander who cannot retain a good sense of themselves. Alternatively they may require the reassuring view to be continually restated, which each time is less and less effective, and leaves the person feeling increasingly dependent on the other’s views. These factors give another turn to the vicious circle and are a further element in the person feeling bad about themselves.

>I have come to understand that in their apparently self-destructive and ill-adapted behaviour, the individual is staying true to their original, most powerful, experiences of trauma, which desperately need to be recognised, accepted, and understood.

>As the trauma-related patterns of interaction have become installed in implicit memory they will inevitably be reconstructed and relived in the analytic relationship.

>It can lead to the individual being able to accept themselves, and to feel accepted, as they are rather than as they feel they should be, or even as they may want to be.

>As I have mentioned, a significant aspect of working with such traumas is the individual’s wish for an idealised, conflict-free world where there is no possibility of further traumatisation. This is often expressed as the patient’s wish for the analyst to be warm, “human”, and to idealistically protect the patient, and certainly not to be bad and retraumatising.

>Gunderson and Singer (1975), in a classic paper giving an overview of the term, describe the individual with a borderline psychology as typically forming an intense relationship with the therapist, and having a strong tendency to regress.

>At first, he saw borderline phenomena, and specifically the difficulty in thinking about oneself or others, as due to the fact that the person cannot bear to think about what is in the mind of the other, as that is, for example, too painfully negative, critical, hateful, uncaring, or murderous (Fonagy, 1991). Over time he has come to develop his understanding to recognise the role of early attachment patterns and, in particular, the parents’ inability to think about their child as an individual in their own right—their ability to mentalize— and he relates this specifically to disturbances of borderline psychology (Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target, 2002; Fonagy, Target, Gergely, Allen, & Bateman, 2003; Fonagy, Gergely, & Target, 2008).

>[the] borderline feels that his or her core object is to be found only through turbulent states of mind. Unconsciously, therefore, the borderline character seeks out turbulence, turning molehills into mountains, and escalating irritations into global states of rage. … In the transference they will split the analyst, between a fragile idealised object and a denigrated object that feels more true, more primary. (Bollas, 2000, p. 9)

>The individual with a borderline personality organisation struggles with life and often feels tortured by it, as they are not able to progress or to feel good about any progressions they do make. They are all the while being disturbed and upset by new or anticipated events which they experience as intensely distressing, anxiety-provoking, and sometimes life-threatening. These are events that trigger a re-experiencing of the affects associated with the original traumas—a retraumatisation—and, as I will describe, a terrifying state of psychic collapse. Such experiences feel extremely real and immediate to the patient, and the analyst can very easily come to take them at face value.
>
>The individual with a borderline personality organisation is thus often disinterested in the “niceties” of analysis as they want and need help and relief from their exposed, agonising, and unbearable-feeling situation, whether that is an immediate crisis or an intolerable long- term state of affairs.

>Freud called this a “negative therapeutic reaction” and suggested that these individuals “prefer suffering to being cured”.

>Freud also, importantly, introduced the concept of repetition compulsion (1914g), a concept much influenced by Janet’s work—where someone unconsciously returns to and repeats traumatic experiences in order, Freud held, to try to master them

>[T]he analyst’s every casual remark, every gesture or movement, may matter enormously and may assume an importance far beyond anything that could be realistically intended. (Balint, 1968, p. 18)

>Fourth, without an understanding that the early relational trauma is being recreated in the analytic relationship in a detailed manner the analyst can easily be led into enactments, as they will likely not understand what the patient is urging upon them so passionately. Therapies that, implicitly or explicitly, foster regression as a means of working through, as described by Ferenczi and Winnicott, for example, are problematical, as documented by Balint, as great pressure can be put on the analyst to enact certain roles, which can lead to the breakdown of the analysis and/or the abuse of the patient (I will explore this further in Chapter Eleven).

>In addition, the need to be able to relinquish and mourn the wish for an ideal rescuer/saviour figure is understood to be central to the process of working through the trauma (rather than simply as one amongst other primitive defences, e.g., Kernberg, 1975), as well as the need to address the shame associated with the trauma, and the consequent difficulty in functioning in a reality-oriented manner.

>Janet proposed that intense arousal (“vehement emotion”) seems to interfere with proper information processing and the storage of information in narrative (explicit) memory … [so that] memories of trauma may have no verbal (explicit) component whatsoever. Instead, the memories may have been organized on an implicit or perceptual level, without any accompanying narrative about what happened. (van der Kolk, 1996b, pp. 286–287)

>It is worth noting that the term flashback can be misleading as it is often thought to mean the unexpected emergence of an image or memory, whereas frequently it is feelings and somatic reactions that are regularly triggered by something almost subliminal in the person’s experience. These often constitute the core of transference experience. Page 53#1 Highlight early relational trauma is frequently a lot more pernicious as it can affect and dominate the individual’s whole personality and life experience.

>PTSD is a condition that severely disrupts individuals’ capacity to perceive, represent, integrate, and act on internal and external stimuli because of major disruptions in the neural systems associated with attention, working memory, and the processing of affective stimuli. (1996, p. x)

>gain a manageable perspective on the events, in other words, to return to ordinary ego-functioning (Richman, 2013; van der Kolk, 2014).

>Judith Herman, one of the early pioneers of trauma work, described the trauma when the child’s early attachment needs, which are imperative and can bear little frustration, are disrupted. She delineated “Complex PTSD” (Herman, 1992, pp. 119ff.) to describe the personality changes which follow from chronic abuse and repeated trauma (often due to subjection to totalitarian control over a prolonged period). She outlined the consequences in relation to affect regulation (including dysphoria, suicidal preoccupation, self-injury, labile rage, and sexuality), consciousness (including amnesia, depersonalisation, and dissociation), self-perception (including shame, guilt, and helplessness), relations with others (including withdrawal and mistrust), systems of meaning (hopelessness and despair), and the perception of the perpetrator (including preoccupation and idealisation). I will be employing the term early relational trauma to include all of the above phenomena.

>The feeling of the mother’s existence lasts x minutes. If the mother is away more than x minutes, then the imago fades, and along with this the baby’s capacity to use the symbol of the union ceases to be a fact. The baby is distressed, but this distress is soon mended because the mother returns in x + y minutes. But in x + y + z minutes the baby has become traumatized. In x'+ y + z minutes the mother’s return does not mend the baby’s altered state. Trauma implies that the baby has experienced a break in life’s continuity, so that primitive defences now become organized to defend against a repetition of “unthinkable anxiety” or of the acute confusional state that belongs to disintegration of the emerging ego structure. (Winnicott, 1967, p. 369, original italics)

>“[d]issociation at the moment of the trauma appears to be the single most important predictor for the establishment of chronic PTSD” (ibid., p. 66).

>Judith Herman, recognising the deeply problematic effects of chronic early trauma, went on to delineate Complex PTSD (1992) and van der Kolk has detailed what he called developmental trauma disorder

>A striking example of the sensorimotor effects of trauma was described by Peter Levine (2005, p. 26) in mammals.9 He describes a video of a polar bear that is chased down by an airplane, shot with a tranquilliser dart, and then tagged. As the animal comes out of its state of shock it begins to tremble; this trembling intensifies into a near-convulsive shaking and, when that stops, the bear takes some deep breaths and appears to recover. Reviewing the convulsive shaking in slow-motion, Levine notes that the movements are actually co-ordinated running, biting, and fighting movements, and he suggests that this corresponds with the bear completing the escape that was interrupted when it was tranquillised.

>When neither resistance nor escape is possible, the human system of self-defense becomes overwhelmed and disorganized. Each component of the ordinary response to danger, having lost its utility, tends to persist in an altered and exaggerated state long after the actual danger is over. (p. 34)

>Describing traumatic experiences in conventional verbal therapy is likely to activate implicit memories in the form of trauma-related physical sensations, physiological dysregulation, involuntary movements, and the accompanying emotions of helplessness, fear, shame, and rage, without providing the resources to process these nonverbal remnants of the past. When this sequence occurs, trauma victims are likely to feel that it still is not safe to deal with the trauma; instead they will tend to seek a supportive relationship in the present. The therapist thereby becomes a refuge from a life marked by ineffectiveness and futility. (Ogden, Minton, & Pain, 2006, p. xxiv)

>In regard to the triggering and potentially retraumatising effect of working with trauma, Ogden, Minton, and Pain describe the hyper and hypo-arousal that is a central feature of trauma, as is described in relation to PTSD above, and describe how individuals frequently oscillate between these two extremes. 
>
>Hyperarousal is the experiencing of “too much” activation to be able to process information effectively, and the individual is tormented by hypervigilance, intrusive images, powerful affects, and body sensations. Hypoarousal is the experiencing of “too little” activation—a numbing sense of deadness or emptiness, passivity and possibly paralysis, being too distanced from the experience to process it effectively. Both poles interfere with cognitive functioning (ibid., p. 26.
>
> Hyperarousal mobilises energy in anticipation of vigorous activity enabling us to carry out fight and flight responses (Levine, 1997; Rothschild, 2000). Because of the accelerated pace of emotions, sensations, and sensory stimuli, however, the capacity for reflection is disrupted and the individual’s behaviour is often reactive and impulsive (Ogden, Minton, & Pain, 2006, p. 34)—a characteristic often noted in the functioning of individuals with a borderline personality organisation. Hypoarousal enables survival-related immobilisation responses such as freeze, submission, and collapse, as well as loss of memory, motor weakness, passivity, fugue, and confusional states. Whilst all of these reactions may be life-saving at the time of the trauma, they can be extremely problematic and maladaptive if they persist in the long term.
>
>Bremner (1999) proposed there are two types of PTSD (Lanius et al., 2010), one characterised by hyperarousal, with a re-experiencing of intrusive flashbacks, the other characterised by hypoarousal, primarily involving dissociative symptoms (see also Schmahl, Lanius, Pain, & Vermetten, 2010).

>“A patient whose attempts to work through past trauma triggers acute primary dissociation, or the frozen numbness of secondary dissociation, is not free to imaginatively explore fantasies and dreams” (2013, p. 496).

>John Bowlby and of Beatrice Beebe and Frank Lachmann

>Mary Main who developed a third category of attachment, “disorganised”

>She developed the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI) (George, Kaplan, & Main, 1985) and postulated that early forms of attachment had their counterparts in adult attachment patterns (Main, Kaplan, & Cassidy, 1985), as follows:
>- Anxious/avoidant infant classification—“dismissing” adult attachment classification. 
>- Anxious/resistant infant classification—“preoccupied” adult attachment classification. 
>- Disorganised/disoriented infant classification—unresolved adult attachment classification. 
>
>Hesse (1996) later described a “cannot classify” category of adult attachment. These are all forms of insecure attachment. 
>
>Researchers into adult attachment tend to describe attachment in relation to two vertices—avoidance and anxiety. Behaviours associated with the dismissive attachment style are “avoidant”, “deactivating”, and “dismissing”, whilst behaviours associated with the preoccupied attachment style are “anxious”, “hyperactivating”, and “preoccupied” (Slade, 2008, p. 766). Slade suggests that the dismissive modes downplay and minimise affect—she describes these as obsessional defences, while the preoccupied modes maximise and intensify affect in order to establish closeness—she describes these as hysterical defences (p. 771). Another dimension that is recognised is that of organised vs. disorganised, which relates to the degree of psychological structure available for containing and regulating emotional experience (p. 771)—this is another way of describing the level of ego-functioning that Jung, following Janet, described as an *abaissement du niveau mental*.
>
>Main’s work provided an invaluable bridge to psychoanalytic theory, and in particular object relations theory, as her and her colleagues’ work was providing evidence that “the quality of early experience, and particularly early relationship, influences adult ways of thinking, knowing, and feeling … and [that] the effect of such influences is routinely transmitted from one generation to the next at the level of structure, rather than content” (ibid., p. 771, original italics).

>Bowlby called these internal working models, Stern incorporated this into his concept of “representations of interactions that are generalized” or, as he later called them, “ways of being with others” (Stern, 1985/1998), Lichtenberg (1989) developed the concept of “model scenes”, Bretherton (1991) called them “scripts”, Bucci (1993, 2011) called them “emotional schemas”, and Lyons-Ruth (1998) developed the concept of “implicit interpersonal knowledge”. Understanding interactions in terms of the attachment behavioural system is a very broad brushstroke approach, whereas calling on internal working models allows a great deal more individual detail (Fonagy, 2001, p. 12).

>## Mentalization 
>
>Peter Fonagy and his colleagues have further developed one aspect of attachment theory, focusing on the finding that the 
>
>security of infant attachment proved to be strongly predicted not only by that parent’s security of attachment during pregnancy (Fonagy, Steele, & Steele, 1991), but even more by the parents’ capacity to understand their own childhood relationships with their own parents in terms of states of mind (Fonagy, Steele, Moran, Steele, & Higgit, 1991). (Fonagy, Gergely, & Target, 2008, pp. 792–793).
>
>They refer to this ability to understand interpersonal behaviour in terms of mental states as mentalization” and “reflective function”. This involves both a self-reflective and an interpersonal component, is both implicit and explicit, and concerns both feelings and cognition.

>Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, and Target (2002) explicitly describe the impact of early experience on mentalization in respect to borderline personality disorder, where they detail how 
>
>failing to find himself in his mother’s mind, [he] finds the mother instead. The infant is forced to internalize the representation of the object’s state of mind as a core part of himself. But in such cases the internalized other remains alien and unconnected to the structures of the constitutional self. (p. 11, original italics). 
>
>They go on to described how the child dissociates from pain by using the alien self to identify with the aggressor and that this involves: (a) a further repudiation of mentalization, at least in attachment contexts, (b) disruption of the psychological self by the emergence of a torturing other within the self, and (c) vital dependence on the physical presence of the other as a vehicle for externalisation. These features, in combination, account for many aspects of disordered functioning in borderline patients. (pp. 12–13) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
>## Liotti’s attachment and relational theory perspective
>Giovanni Liotti (2004a, 2007) is one of many who links adult psychopathology to disorganised attachment patterns. Liotti cites Schuengel, Van Ijzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1999), as having gathered “[e]mpirical evidence that not only aggressive attitudes, but also frightened and dissociative behaviour of the caregiver towards the infant can cause disorganization in the infant’s attachment behaviour” (Liotti, 2007, p. 128). He explains the origins of disorganised attachment in terms of a conflict between two different inborn control systems—the attachment system and the fight/flight (i.e., defence) system. He writes: T
>
>The attachment and defence systems normally operate in harmony as exemplified in flight from the source of fear to find refuge in proximity to the attachment figure. However, where the caregiver is at the same time the source and the solution of the infant’s fear, there is a clash (Liotti, 2004a, b). Being exposed to frequent interactions with a helplessly frightened, hostile, frightening, or confused caregiver, infants are caught in a relational trap: their defence system motivates them to flee from the frightened and/or frightening caregivers, while at the same time their attachment system motivates them, under the commanding influence of separation fear, to strive to achieve comforting proximity to them. Thus, the disorganized infant is bound to the experience of “fright without solution” (Cassidy & Mohr, 2001; Main & Hesse, 1990, p. 163). (Liotti, 2007, p. 129).
>
>He describes this as a “type of early relational trauma that exerts an adverse influence on the development of the system in the infant’s brain that copes with stress (Schore, 2003)”. He links the trauma back to the “innate contingency detection module whose function is to explore the environment in search of mirroring experiences (Koos & Gergely, resulting in the system functioning in a seriously dysfunctional manner (see also West, 2004, 2007, & below). Specifically, it leads to a rapid “switching” between attention to the self and the other, which represents a “dissociative style of attention and information processing that researchers and theoreticians regard as typical of attachment disorganization (Liotti, 1992, 1999; Lyons-Ruth, 2003; Main & Morgan, 1996)” (Liotti, 2007, pp. 129–130). Liotti specifically relates disorganised attachment, with its concomitant dissociative processes characterised by “severe dissociation, splitting among ego states, and fragmentation of the self”, with borderline functioning (ibid., p. 130). 
>
>This is the pattern of the child who at the same time clings to the caregiver and turns away from them that is described so vividly and in such detail by Beebe and Lachmann (2013—and see Chapter Seven in this book). I will give an example of this clinging for comfort whilst unable to be comforted or, put slightly differently, desperately wanting to connect whilst feeling unconnected and unable to connect, at the end of this chapter. 
>
>Liotti (2007) further describes how the caregivers’ subtle or explicit reactions to their own traumas and losses might well activate the child’s “caregiving system” such that “the disorganized child is likely to have an experience of the self during attachment interactions of at least three types of contradictory and reciprocally incompatible ways of responding: care-seeking, caregiving, and defensive fight/flight” (p. 135).
>
>He describes how such individuals “typically show multiple, non- integrated dramatic representations of self and attachment figures, shifting between hostility, helplessness, and compulsive caregiving (Lyons-Ruth, Yellin, Melnick, & Atwood, 2003, 2005)”. He has previously suggested (1995, 1999, 2004a, 2004b) that these representations and patterns are manifested in the “drama triangle” (Karpman, 1968) of three reciprocally incompatible roles: the helpless victim, the powerful- benevolent rescuer, and the powerful but malevolent persecutor.
>
>These patterns are reflected in caregiving or domineering-punitive strategies that allow the child to exert some active control over the parents’ attention and behaviour. These strategies give the child some relief from the unbearably chaotic experience of disorganisation by inhibiting the attachment system and activating the caregiving system, thus offering the child some degree of organisation.
>
>Liotti also hypothesises that “some disorganized children resort to a general inhibition of relational needs and tend to withdraw from all types of close affective interaction” 



>In detail, Beebe and Lachmann noted how mother and infant engage in mirroring of the other’s facial expressions. They write that “the key mechanism is the perception and production of similarity” (2013, p. 26) and discuss this in terms of contingency (Ch. 3), a phenomenon I explored in earlier work linking it to adult psychopathology and the work of Matte Blanco (West, 2004, 2007). When there is a “mismatch” in the mirroring, which is entirely normal in any interaction (Tronick & Gianino, 1986), this causes distress and the mother and/or the infant may act to try to repair the mismatch. The infant attempts to do this through cooing, gesturing, crying out, or registering their distress in other ways, thus trying to re-engage the (m)other and re-establish a harmonious link.
>
>Tronick and Gianino describe how, if the infant is successful in repairing the mismatches, they can “experience positive emotions and establish a positive affective core” (p. 156). Their effectiveness at “getting through” to the other increases their sense of agency (see Knox, 2010), and allows them to internalise a pattern of interaction that they bring to interactions with others (Tronick & Gianino, 1986, p. 156). However, if the infant is repeatedly unsuccessful in repairing mismatches they come to feel helpless, focus their behaviour on self-regulation, limit their engagement with their social environment, and “establish a negative affective core” (ibid., p. 156).
>
>In the video material described by Beebe and Lachmann, the infants’ distress at the continuing mismatch can be observed in their crying, agitation, and turning away from the mother and, in one case, of the infant being sick. This negative affective core that Tronick and Gianino describe is characteristic of individuals with a borderline psychology (Kernberg, 1975; West, 2007).
>
>This kind of functioning, characterised by distress at mismatching, is significant as it characterises not only the early form of relationship between infant and caregiver, but also persists as a continuous form of primitive functioning that goes on unconsciously in and between adults. It is this sensitivity that, for example, makes us embarrassed by our social gaffes, bridle at criticism, feel foolish when we make a mistake, and wary of expressing what we really think in so far as it might be in conflict with the views of whatever group we are in.

>Beebe and Lachmann propose that infants who will go on to be classified as having a disorganised attachment pattern cannot develop an expectation of feeling “sensed” or “known”, particularly when distressed, and that
>
>[d]isturbances of recognition were identified in all communication domains … In attention, the infant may feel not seen; in emotion the infant may feel not joined, and stonewalled when distressed; in orientation the infant experiences looming impingements; and in touch the infant is not touched more tenderly when he shows more aroused touch patterns. At times these infants may feel alarmed or threatened. (ibid., p. 62)

>Bureau, Martin, and Lyons-Ruth (2010) describe how 
>
>the experience of threat is very different during infancy … [and that] during early life, a hidden trauma can occur, resulting not from physical assault but from the unavailability of a responsive attachment figure to comfort and regulate the stress of the fear-evoking events that are a daily part of the infant’s experience. (p. 48, original italics) 
>
>In their paper, which is in an excellent collection of papers about the “hidden epidemic” of these “hidden traumas” of early neglect (Lanius, Vermetten, & Pain, 2010), they go on to discuss the long-term consequences associated with “early unresponsive care, including increased dissociation, depression and the self-damaging behaviours characteristic of borderline personality disorder”. The collection of papers as a whole, citing literally thousands of studies (see van der Kolk & d’Andrea, 2010), offers compelling evidence of the long-term consequences of early relational disturbances.

>I can then point out that she is not wrong or bad, as she feels, and explore her wish to get rid of this distressed part of herself (an identification with her mother expressed on the subjective level) and thus “just get better”, “get on with it”, and end the analysis. I suggest that her “feeling worse” is in fact her bringing this early dynamic into painful high-relief, where we can better appreciate her extremely difficult and traumatic early experience of not being able to get through to her mother who could, in some very real way, not bear her.
>
>Dorothy feeling bad about herself also represents a form of Fairbairn’s moral defence (see Chapter Eleven), which allowed her to feel that she was wrong but that her mother was good, and thus Dorothy was able to maintain the link to her. Feeling that she is bad or wrong also gives her an illusory sense of control over such relationships and keeps alive the phantasy-wish that if only she could do better herself she could get what she wants from her mother and others.

>Ogden, Minton and Pain write:
>
>A defensive action, such as freezing or fighting, becomes a generalized response to perceived threat, causing traumatized clients to feel that they cannot cope with everyday challenges. (2006, p. 87)

>A freeze response is the core of a borderline personality organisation (in the narrow sense of the term), where the individual is held in thrall to, and is repeatedly triggered by, negative, disconfirming, annihilating, frustrating, and rejecting experiences from which they cannot seem to escape (they are rendered powerless and “frozen”). Negative experiences are at the core of their being, as I have described in Chapter Four, and the individual has little hope that things could be otherwise. Because negative experiences resonate so powerfully, and are felt to characterise “who the individual is”, good experience has significantly less effect, and sadly little lasting effect, on the individual with a borderline personality organisation, who feels unable to hang on to it. I have described, quoting Tronick and Gianino (1986), how this negativeexperience and core negative sense of self is built up from repeated mismatches in relationships that are insufficiently repaired.
>
>The individual with a borderline personality organisation characteristically feels that the other won’t love them or care about them and is hurt, angry, and despairing about it. They present their distress angrily and hopelessly, wanting the other to “pick up the pieces” of their broken life (West, 2007, pp. 211ff.), continually testing the world and challenging the other to prove that they do care, or confirm that they don’t. At the heart of this personality organisation, as it is presented in reversed form, the individual is themselves essentially rejecting of relationship as it is experienced as too toxic (Rosenfeld sees this in terms of destructive narcissism). The wish for an ideal, reparatory object to “make good” past experience, and the fear of the toxic elements of the real object, leads the individual to both approach and reject the object at the same time in a disorganised attachment pattern.
>
>*The collapse/submit response and the hysterical personality organisation*
>
>At the heart of the hysterical personality organisation are experiences of collapse and submission in response to the threatening object, often to the point of the experience of dying. Thus suicide—the taking of the experience of dying and being killed off into the person’s sphere of omnipotence—is integral to the hysterical personality organisation.2 The collapse might be because the individual is overwhelmed by the threat or power of the other, or because it is not safe to respond in any other way, for example, to fight. Porges describes this as the most primitive response to threat, whilst Krystal (1978) proposed that trauma should be defined only in these terms. The individual with a hysterical personality organisation has thus learnt from very early on, as Bollas puts it, to “suspend their own idiom”, to dissociate from/ vacate themselves and put themselves in the hands of the other, for better and for worse. The hysteric, who has submitted to the other (in one respect at least) and abandoned themselves on the other’s “door- step”, demands, desperately, and plaintively: “You won’t abandon me, will you?”, “How could you not love me?”, “How could you let me down?”, “Why do you hate me?”. Slade suggests that this way of being maximises and intensifies affects in order to establish closeness (Slade, 2008, p. 771). 

>*Hypervigilance and the obsessional personality organisation*
>
>At the heart of anxious and obsessional personality organisations lies the hypervigilance with which the individual is always scanning for threat.3 The individual is thus constantly anxious, is trying to remain all the time in control and to know “what to do” in order to limit the range of their emotional experiences and, ideally, to eliminate anxiety completely. They are preoccupied by, and ruminate over, potential catastrophes, and nothing can be said to adequately reassure them that these will not occur. When the reassurance fails, the individual may resort to obsessional physical or mental activity, such as hand-washing, checking, or negative thinking, which takes on a life of its own. 
>
>The individual with an obsessional personality organisation is characteristically, continually checking: “Do you love me?”, “Do you care?”, “Will you abandon me?”, “Perhaps you’ll abandon me now as you must be getting tired of reassuring me?”, “Perhaps you have stopped caring (as I am too much for you)?” This constant activity frequently leaves the individual exhausted, burnt out, and inevitably feeling a failure for not being able to ward off all possible threat and control their feelings. It often leads to depression.

>The borderline personality organisation and the freeze response 
>
>Anna came into analysis anxious and agoraphobic, feeling unable to cope with the world, feeling desperate, hopeless, and powerless about her position in it.

>*The obsessional personality organisation and hypervigilance*
>
>Daniella came to therapy anxious, phobic, and struggling at work. She felt despairing and hypercritical of herself and her inability to master her anxiety. She had previously been depressed. She recognised that she was always anticipating threat and conflict and that she over-reacted to criticism and the threat of criticism, focusing on those things to the exclusion of good experiences. She felt she ought to be more effective, to know what to do, and to be more in control, and she continually compared herself unfavourably with others.
>
>We recognised that her hypervigilance related to her early life with her father who was extremely ambitious, pushed himself very hard, and had great expectations for his children, although this was usually expressed through being disappointed with them. Her mother was herself anxious and fearful of her husband’s criticism and dissatisfaction, and particularly that he would leave her for another woman. Daniella thus found herself having to manage her anxiety and keep it secret from her mother, to whom she felt it would only be a burden.
>
>It was important that we could help Daniella recognise the way in which her anxiety was related to her hypervigilance against further trauma, and explore her unrealistic hope of being in control of her feelings (she had previously had CBT which had been successful only to a limited extent), and her unrealistic expectations on herself. She also had to suffer the disillusionment that merely understanding these things would protect her from anxiety, as well as having to work through her disillusionment with me as someone who might be able to take the bad feelings away and give her control over her psyche. This represented a slow and uncomfortable realisation of what it really means to be human, especially the limitations.

> 1. I would like to repeat that the aim of outlining these patterns is not to mindlessly classify and pigeonhole individuals, but rather to better understand their motivations, struggles, conflicts, and distress. The individual is above and beyond all “categories” into which their behaviour may fall and can certainly not be reduced to them. I believe that understanding the underlying early traumatic experience assists in this separation of person from label.

>The internal working model is born out of the child’s necessary anticipation and adaptation to those around them, as intricately described by Beebe and Lachmann (2013) (see Chapter Four of this book), who demonstrate how the child’s expectation and anticipation forms an integral element of the way they relate. The individual does not react to what the other person has “just done”, but to what they expect them to do, thus often playing a significant role in that happening (making it a self- fulfilling prophecy). The development of the internal working model thus allows the individual to predict the behaviour of significant others and to accommodate to them, minimising mismatches and “shocking” surprises, as the core self cannot bear too much difference or intrusion (Ferenczi, 1932a; West, 2004, 2007). 

 >This rescuer role very much related to her idealised wish for someone to make good the care she had not experienced early on from either her mother or father.

>So for Anna, the experience of unresponsiveness and rejection was so early and powerful as to have become foundational for her. She saw it everywhere and in everything. It thus frequently seemed not to relate to particular experiences but to be a universal truth. It is precisely this aspect of early experience that makes it seem absolutely current and about the present, and able to latch on to, and organise, current experience.

>Bowlby recognised that the internal working model provides the nuanced detail for the attachment pattern.

>When it comes to the detail of analytic relationship, analyst and patient are on an equal level relationally. Both are open to the responsiveness, silence, withdrawal, looking away, ignoring, warmth, appreciation, negation, and so on, of the other. Whilst the analyst will hopefully be able to contain their reactions to some extent, and call upon their understanding of what is going on, there will still be the same “primitive”, by which I mean, basic, human, reactions evoked. In saying this I am giving emphasis to the implicit, non-verbal aspects of relating, in contrast to the verbal, content-driven perspective. 

>The basic unit of the mother–infant communication system is action knowledge, based on predictable patterns of behaviour across time. These predictable patterns of interactions generate expectancies of actions and action sequences. Continuous moment- to-moment variation provides each partner an essential means of sensing the self and the other … what is at stake in the infant’s procedural expectancies of self- and interactive contingency is the organization of intimate relating.

>“what we experience as our own behaviour is actually an emergent property of the dyad. To understand ourselves dyadically is to see ourselves as more porous and vulnerable to the state and behaviour of the other than we would often like to think”

>Some form of response by the analyst is required for the particular dynamic to evolve, whether that is “passive consent or active participation”, in other words, the analyst’s action or inaction plays a key role in the patient’s expectations, and the events that unfold are a co-construction by both patient and analyst.

>*Reconstruction and re-enactment*
>
>I continue to find the way that early experiences and patterns of relating emerge in and structure the analyst–patient relationship truly remarkable. It is as if the past is shining through the present, so that what may appear as the patient’s “psychopathology” or an inability to “properly relate”, or an attempt to “maintain an infantile perverted state of mind” (Fordham, 1974, p. 198), are in fact invaluable, detailed re-enactments which allow that early experience to be known. Davies describes this co-construction in terms of a “therapeutic enactment”, where there is: 
>
>a collapsing of past and present; a co-constructed organization of the transference–countertransference matrix that bears such striking similarity to an important moment of the past that patient and analyst together have the unique opportunity to exist in both places at the same time. (Davies, 1997, p. 246) 

>In regard to the reliving of early traumatic experience, I have found that this quite frequently includes a re-experiencing of some form of annihilation, dying, or death, often accompanied by a terror of fragmentation or going mad, all of which feels completely impossible, unbearable, and shameful to the patient. Whilst the analyst’s understanding of what is going on offers an invaluable containing framework, this experience is nevertheless truly terrifying for the patient, and I have found that extra sessions are sometimes necessary for a time, particularly as the patient’s friends and/or family are not able to really understand and bear with what they are going through.

>This central experience had come to form a core belief about herself—that she was not likeable, let alone loveable, whilst other people were loveable and could be close and intimate.

>Dyadically expanded states of consciousness
>
>Ed Tronick and his colleagues (1998)3 suggest that humans strongly seek states of emotional connectedness and intersubjectivity, not simply because this motivation is inherent to all humans, but due to the “dyadically expanded states of consciousness” that are achieved when connectedness occurs. The failure to achieve these states is extremely aversive, see for example Tronick’s “still-face experiment”4 (Tronick, Als, Adamson, Wise, & Brazelton, 1978), and has a severely damaging effect on the mental health of the infant. They write:
>
>The states of consciousness of the infant and of the mother are more inclusive and coherent at the moment when they form a dyadic state (a moment of meeting; see Stern, 1998) because it incorporates elements of the state of consciousness of the other. (Tronick et al., 1998, p. 408).
>
>To put this in other words, the regulation of the self (“inclusive and coherent self-states”) goes on significantly through interaction with the other; or again, in slightly different terms, a secure attachment relationship down-regulates states of distress. In describing the effect of chronic denial of these states when a mother is depressed, they describe how,
>
>[g]iven that the infant’s system functions to expand its complexity and coherence, one way open for the infant of the depressed mother to accomplish this expansion is to take on elements of the mother’s state of consciousness. These elements will be negative—sad and hostile affect, withdrawal, and disengagement. However, by taking them on the infant and the mother may form a dyadic state of consciousness, but one that is negative at its core. Thus, in the service of becoming more complex and coherent, the infant incorporates depressive elements from the mother’s state of consciousness. This dyadic state of consciousness contains painful elements, but its painfulness does not override the need for expansion. (p. 409)
>
>Critically, the individual takes these features into other relationships which often leads to “a debilitating attachment to negative relational experiences” (p. 409). This is another way of describing internal working models or what Lyons-Ruth (1998) calls implicit relational knowing.
>
>I would suggest that the crucial “moments of meeting”, as described with Anna, require that the analyst is able to “take on elements of the [patient’s] state of consciousness” and that, like the child with the depressed mother, “these elements will be negative”. It is the analyst meeting and containing (and not altering or ejecting) these negative states that is key to working through the traumatic complex. In the clinical situations that I am describing in this book, that has entailed being experienced as the bad object as a result of the painful and painstaking, organic, co-construction of these experiences by and between both patient and analyst. 

>*The real relationship*
>
>Strachey (1934) originally coined the phrase “the real relationship”, to distinguish what was real from the phantasies that the patient may have about the analyst. This phrase has frequently been used, by both patients and analysts, to refer to the qualities of the analyst as a warm, kindly, and concerned human being, and contrasted with their rational, analytic functioning. Fordham (1974) describes exactly this split, and the patient’s quest to obtain the “real person” of the analyst for themselves, or otherwise to believe that the analyst is either denying the patient access to, or is incapable of, such human warmth and kindness. As I will be exploring in Chapter Nine, I suggest that this splitting of the analyst into cognitive and affective elements represents a search for an idealised, conflict-free relationship that bears no risk of retraumatisation (but thus avoids addressing the trauma).
>
>This splitting rests on a misrepresentation, in that the analyst’s spontaneous affective-somatic reactions are equally a vital part of their analytic functioning, and that their cognitive responses are equally a part of their human boundariedness, and vital for their engagement with affect. As Damasio (1995, 1999) has pointed out, an individual’s rational ego-functioning is build out of and on top of their affective-somatic reactions.
>
>Lyons-Ruth (1998) defines the term real relationship as the intersubjective field constituted by the intersection of the patient’s and the therapist’s implicit relational knowing. This field extends beyond the transference–countertransference domain to include authentic personal engagement and reasonably accurate sensing of each person’s current “ways of being with”. (p. 33)
>
>As I will be continuing to explore later, the analyst does contribute substantially to the nature of the relationship with their particular, personal, “ways of being with” (Chapter Twelve). Whether or not the analyst considers their cognitive and ego-functions to be intrinsic to who they are, or rather an obstacle to a more human or enlightened way of being (see Chapter Eight), will very much depend on how they have dealt with their own idealisation, and how and whether they have integrated and worked through their own traumatic complexes.
>
>Colman (2003, 2013) has criticised some psychoanalytic models for overemphasising the aspect of phantasy in relationship, specifically in seeing projective identification in those terms, and not sufficiently recognising the real relationship and the role of relationship itself in the analytic process. I think he is absolutely correct in this; however, I would suggest that the primary, overriding value of the analytic relationship is in being able to stay with and bear the patient’s experience as it is, allowing the person thereby to connect up with and integrate their complexes with their core self, thereby achieving congruence and an experience of wholeness. As I describe in this book, this involves the whole person of the analyst (cognitive, affective, and somatic), as well as their capacity to allow the patient’s most difficult experiences to be made manifest in the analytic relationship. 

>I have come to realise, although it may seem rather dry to put it this way, that the key characteristic linking the phenomena related to trauma is the disruption of ego-functioning. This lies behind the trauma itself (and is a definitive element of trauma); the struggle to form a coherent identity; the re-enactment of events that can’t be remembered but are held in procedural memory; the subjective experience of disturbance, fragility, regression, and vulnerability; self-denigration and envy; the pressures and distress manifested in the analytic relationship; and the grieving that occurs, in one form or another, if the person is to recover from the trauma and move out of their regressed state and towards a more manageable and fulfilling way of life. 

 >There is a further aspect of disidentification with the ego which is particularly significant when someone has experienced early relational trauma, or indeed any kind of trauma, which relates to the reliving of the defeat of the ego. As I have already stated, the experience of defeat of the ego—the experience of “collapse & submit”—underlies early relational trauma, even if that response does not become primary and other responses, such as fight or flight, serve to defend against it. Frequently the individual re-experiencing this defeat will experience extreme difficulty, terror, and shame, feeling that they are powerless, that they cannot deal with what is happening, cannot cope, will not survive, and are breaking down, fragmenting, and dying. This is a truly terrifying experience.

>Porges describes how an area located in the temporal lobe of the cortex is responsible for identifying familiar faces and voices, and thus plays a vital role in identifying whether or not they are “safe, dangerous, or life-threatening” in a process he calls “neuroception” (Porges, 2011, p. 11). He writes:
>
>If neuroception identifies a person as safe then a neural circuit [known as “the vagal brake”] actively inhibits areas of the brain that organize the defensive strategies of fight, flight or freeze. … [W]hen situations appear risky, the brain circuits that regulate defensive strategies are activated. Social approaches are met with aggressive behavior or withdrawal. (Porges, 2011, p. 13) 
>
>Bowlby called this continual processing of experience “appraisal”. When the individual feels under threat they will “prefer” a return to familiarity and the similarity to good experience, although there may also be a certain comfort in the familiarity of bad experiences (see below). Matte Blanco (1975, 1988) called this recognition of the similarity between things “symmetry”, and understood it as the defining characteristic of unconscious functioning. 

 

>When individuals are operating primarily on the level of ego- functioning, respecting each other’s autonomy and separateness, such intimacy and spontaneous exchanges between the patient’s and the analyst’s core selves—the Boston Change Process Study Group (1998) call them “moments of meeting”—are inevitably fleeting. I see them as moments of grace, although they can be underpinned by a sense of ongoing connectedness to the other.
>
>The individual’s ability to express themselves, to be spontaneous and creative, and to unfold (deintegrate), is the essence of the life force.2 Mismatches that occur in this process can be experienced as annihilating—the unbearable trampling on new shoots—particularly when ego-functioning has been disrupted. This is the (extremely) sensitive core self that we need to defend at all costs; Donald Kalsched (1996, 2013) calls it “the soul”.
>
>However, never to trample on new shoots would require the analyst to accommodate the other to an impossible degree and specifically to incur the annihilation of the analyst’s separate individuality. This can lead, in some form or another, to the breakdown of the analytic frame and ultimately of the analysis itself, which must remain essentially a two-person process (see the discussion of new shoots and love in the following chapter). As Balint said in relation to regression and the state of primary love (quoted in Chapter Two), this is a “two-person relationship in which, however, only one of the partners matters” (1968, p. 17).

>The desire for an ideal typically becomes dissociated from the original traumatic circumstances so that the individual comes to long for this ideal state in its own right, with the traumatic origins and underpinnings of the idealisation becoming lost. In order to return to everyday ego-functioning, with a sense of self-agency, self-determination, and autonomy, the individual will need to be able to mourn the wish for an ideal world or an idealised rescuer who will protect the individual’s core self and make good the experiences the individual had or did not have in the past.

>Freud, on the other hand, recognised the pressures that maintaining the ideal put upon the other, and saw idealisation in terms of narcissism, where “idealisation of the object” is part of an attempt “to recover the supposedly omnipotent state of infantile narcissism” (Laplanche & Pontalis, 1973, p. 202). Freud’s concept of primary narcissism would constitute a state where there would be no traumatisation.

>Clearly these situations could be seen in oedipal terms—that the person wants a close, loving, protective, exclusive, and sometimes sexual relationship with the analyst, not disturbed by the imposition of an other. This other could be the father, the mother, the grandparent, or the sibling, or the analyst’s self-preoccupation, unavailability, thinking, theory, or containment. As Britton (1998, p. 42) points out, analytic thinking can represent the resented oedipal “third”.

>As for the analytic relationship itself, it is not built upon the pleasure principle, it is not about being liked, being nice, kind, or good, for either analyst or patient. It is built on the deeper bedrock of being able to be yourself as you are, being able to be real, and being accepted for that. For both patient and analyst this means staying true to their primitive responses, yet finding a place for those within themselves and finding they are accepted by the other. The challenge to stay real and to face what is most difficult is a gift that the analyst equally receives from the patient and which I received, gratefully, from Michael. Such exchanges engender the deepest respect and appreciation. The connection and bond that develops between analyst and patient is forged through this journeying together through the underworld. 

 >These pressures are usually understood in terms of Klein’s (1946) conceptualisation of projective identification, which she saw as a form of oral-sadistic object relations (an attempt to scoop out and possess the object) or anal-sadistic object relations (an attempt to punish the object and eject unbearable affects). She held these to be related to the splitting that occurs in the paranoid-schizoid position, which also entails an overvaluation of, and dependency on, the object and a consequent “weakening and impoverishment” of the individual’s own ego-functioning.
> 
> Bion modified this view to suggest that “excessive projective identification” takes place when the infant has been unable to communicate their early, distressing feelings to their caregivers (1959). In line with his theory of thinking, he saw projective identification as essentially a normal part of the process of communication and relating. Specifically, that the infant/patient projects their primitive affects (beta particles) into the parent/analyst in the hope that they can make sense of them, contain them, and, where necessary, act upon them to alleviate the infant’s/patient’s distress (having understood them with their thinking, alpha-functioning) (1962a, 1962b).

>Furthermore, whilst I think the concept of projective identification is an ingenious, generalised formulation, the analyst on the ground will likely be struggling to understand how to engage with what the patient is bringing, and to reconcile that with their empathic experience of the patient’s suffering, as well as the (mostly unconscious) dynamics related to concern, helpfulness, and not wanting to be experienced as bad, abandoning, cruel, or inept. It requires a good deal of experience before the concept of projective identification is readily recognisable and useful to the analyst in this context.

>It is clear that the core self cannot bear the shock of impingement, rupture, violation, or neglect, which is why so much effort is put into attempting to anticipate the other’s reactions (Beebe & Lachmann, 2013). Needing to be protected at all costs from these narcissistic wounds, the core self will call up omnipotent defences in order to do so, whether that is in the form of denial, omnipotence, idealisation, splitting (both of the self, in terms of dissociation, or the other, in terms of good and bad), projection or projective identification, and will react to impingement by the means I have outlined: fight, flight, freeze, or collapse (West, 2013b).
>
>One elaboration of Rosenfeld’s theory was a distinction he made between libidinal and destructive narcissism (Rosenfeld, 1971). In libidinal narcissism there is an attempt to control the loving, caring object on whom one is dependent, whilst in destructive narcissism “any wish on the part of the self to experience the need for an object and to depend on it are devalued, attacked, and destroyed with pleasure” (Rosenfeld, 1987,p. 22, original italics). He describes destructive narcissism as having a particular, hidden and hypnotic power, which is a significant factor in the negative therapeutic reaction. He adds that, “such destructive and omnipotent wishes are often difficult to recognize in what a patient does and says because the patient unconsciously experiences them as protective and even benevolent, but very secretly” (p. 22).

>He also recognised that, “… transference need not be restricted to the illusory apperception of another person …, but can be taken to include the unconscious (and often subtle) attempts to manipulate or to provoke situations with others which are a concealed repetition of earlier experiences and relationships” (Sandler, Dare, & Holder, 1973, p. 48, my italics).
>
>He recognised that the process whereby the analyst is influenced by the patient, takes the form of the patient’s 
>
>>externalisation of the object representation, which has been revised in phantasy to contain the unwanted aspect of the self, on to an external object. This externalisation takes the form of actualisation, a process in which the object is pushed, by a variety of subtle unconscious manoeuvres, both verbal and non-verbal, into playing a particular role for the patient. (Sandler, 1993, p. 1104)

>Sandler’s conceptualisation of role responsiveness coheres with the experience of the patient who is acting from their (unconsciously held) internal working models, which represent powerfully held expectations and beliefs about the world and others. Examples of these are: “No one would really like me/love me/want to relate to me”, “People will reject my love and affection”, or, perhaps, “People will want me and will let me into their inner self”. The patient may well experience considerable frustration, confusion, irritation, and disbelief if the analyst does not both share and act in accordance with the patient’s unconscious expectations/internal working models. 

>Like Sandler, Robert Caper (1999), describes how, having naturally come to (largely unconsciously) identify with the patient, the analyst must come to disidentify sufficiently to remain separate, to think about and understand what they have learnt about the patient’s experience and way of relating, and communicate this to the patient. Jessica Benjamin, as I will explore further below, understands this in terms of the analyst holding the tension between identificatory oneness and the observing function; she calls this “the third in the one”; for example, maintaining an awareness that the patient’s distress will pass, alongside the analyst’s empathy for the patient (Benjamin, 2004, p. 14).
>
>The analyst communicating their understanding to the patient can hopefully allow the patient to recognise the patterns, to understand what has triggered them, to disidentify with them to some extent, and to thus direct them in a way that is more constructive; although, at base, it is the trauma at the heart of the complex continuing to feel unbearable that fuels the dynamic embodied by the internal working model and that gives it its power, and affects the analyst.
>
>I am particularly interested, however, in why it is so difficult for the analyst to sufficiently disidentify at times, whilst maintaining an empathic understanding, and will suggest that this is due to experiences that are particularly traumatising and “inhuman” that the analyst struggles to allow themselves to experience, acknowledge, and embody (Gabbard, 1997; Knox, 2013). These are frequently not pre-existing feelings for the analyst, but rather experiences that emerge, perhaps for the first time, in relation with the patient. This therefore represents something of a personal journey of discovery and experience for the analyst (Chapter Twelve).
>
>Whilst the foregoing has focused largely on the theory around these experiences I would like to explore the actual experiences as they are met with in the consulting room in more detail and will turn to what Michael Fordham says on the subject, before offering a fuller, narrative picture.

>*Fordham—defences of the self*
>
>Whilst I outlined Michael Fordham’s (1974) concept of defences of the self in Chapter Two, I will return to it now to explore how those defences affect the analyst. Fordham, in the most widely read and often quoted paper in the post-Jungian literature, describes the patient’s defences of the self—the powerful reactions against what they experience as “not- self” parts of the analyst, in other words, the parts of the analyst that are different from the patient (this is characteristic of the primary process functioning of the core self when it is exposed due to the disruption of ego-functioning).
>
>Fordham describes how the patient reacts against the parts of the analyst that they see as “technical and mechanistic” (which I understand primarily as the analyst’s ego-functioning), and attempts to “unmask and obtain” a “good, hidden part” of the analyst for themself. Thus they may treat the analyst’s comments and interpretations as cold, unfeeling, and theoretical, or even as attempts by the analyst to defend themself against their own “infantile parts”, which the patient holds they are projecting into the patient. They may react “with denigration ending up in load groans, screams or tears whenever the analyst speaks” (Fordham, 1974, p. 193). He describes how the patient becomes extremely distressed and can come to feel that their pain, terror, dread, and confusion is directly caused by what they see as the analyst’s “sadism, cruelty and destructiveness”.
>
>In my experience the patient can powerfully and viscerally object to any attempt by the analyst to put their understanding (in so far as it offers a different perspective to that of the patient) into words, precisely because they feel that their experience is not being heard, and any words are felt like the analyst “defending themself”. Furthermore, the patient naturally objects if they feel they are being packaged, labelled, or reduced to a cognitive construct that will in no way address their powerful affective experiences, which lie at the heart of their sense of themselves.
>
>The analyst needs to have enough trust in the patient, and in the process of analysis, to allow the patient to voice their experience unopposed and concentrate on getting to the truth of the patient’s experience, however wrong it may seem. Fordham calls this a psychotic transference precisely because the patient’s experiences do not make sense from a rational, that is to say, ego perspective. I will discuss this in the following chapter in terms of the defeat of the analyst’s ego, but it is essentially about respecting the (subjective) truth of the patient’s experience. Any other perspectives can be worked out later, but until that truth is heard and appreciated little progress can be made.

>She says that she sees the “engagement in reciprocal recognition of the other as growing naturally out of the experience of being recognized by the other, as a crucial component of attachment responses that require mutual regulation and attunement” (p. 6).

>“now she had the experience that her love survived the destructiveness of our interaction, my mistakes and limitations” (p. 40).

>In so far as this state of mind comes to imbue the analytic relationship, the patient and analyst may find themselves experiencing a “special” kind of connectedness and understanding, an ability to know what each other is thinking (see Gabbard and Lester’s comments on Jung’s relationship with Sabina Spielrein (1995, ch. 5)), a highly charged state of well-being and universal connectedness, that may be felt as a quasi-mystical form of love. Or this state of mind may be more fleetingly glimpsed and, instead, the patient is left vigilantly expecting and fearing the analyst will let them down or betray them in some way, whilst the analyst is left walking on eggshells, feeling that their comments or interpretations will in some way spoil the relationship (Caper, 1995/1999, p. 35). 

 >Fordham describes how the patient reacts against the parts of the analyst that they see as “technical and mechanistic” (which I understand primarily as the analyst’s ego-functioning), and attempts to “unmask and obtain” a “good, hidden part” of the analyst for themself. Thus they may treat the analyst’s comments and interpretations as cold, unfeeling, and theoretical, or even as attempts by the analyst to defend themself against their own “infantile parts”, which the patient holds they are projecting into the patient. They may react “with denigration ending up in load groans, screams or tears whenever the analyst speaks” (Fordham, 1974, p. 193). He describes how the patient becomes extremely distressed and can come to feel that their pain, terror, dread, and confusion is directly caused by what they see as the analyst’s “sadism, cruelty and destructiveness”. In my experience the patient can powerfully and viscerally object to any attempt by the analyst to put their understanding (in so far as it offers a different perspective to that of the patient) into words, precisely because they feel that their experience is not being heard, and any words are felt like the analyst “defending themself”.

>If the analyst does not allow himself to be experienced as the old object from the past, the patient’s efforts to work through experiences from childhood will be compromised” (p. 146). 

 

 >Philip Bromberg puts it very well when he writes:
>  
>>the analytic relationship become[s] a place that supports risk and safety simultaneously—a relationship that allows the painful reliving of early trauma, without the reliving being just a blind repetition of the past. It is optimally a relationship that I have described as “safe but not too safe” (Bromberg, 2006, pp. 153–202), by which I mean that the analyst is communicating both his ongoing concern for his patient’s affective safety and his commitment to the value of the inevitably painful process of reliving. (Bromberg, 2011, pp. 16–17, original italics) 

 

 

 



>The relationship has, in essence, become an addiction for the patient, who must receive larger and larger infusions of compensation to be satisfied. As with any addiction, each dose stimulates an inevitable demand for more, and ultimately the demands can simply not be met. One must remember that though the child demands ever- increasing expressions of love as compensation, she has in her dissociated state never experienced anything but abuse, neglect, and betrayal. 

>Only self-sufficiency and a renunciation of all dependency needs create a margin of safety. 

>Every analysis is a very real journey for both patient and analyst where things are only learnt and seen along the way, and where it only slowly becomes possible to bear, confront, and put certain things into words. 

>As Stern says, “it is vital for the patient to discover that someone is desirous of knowing what it feels like to be him or her” (1985/1998, p. 32).
>
>This can represent a considerable journey for the analyst—to really stay only with the patient’s experience, to trust that the patient can bear for this not to be “made better”, to trust that their psyche can contain it, to trust in the analytic process, and that this will work (though there are no guarantees). I see this as akin to the trust that Orpheus needed in order not to look back. 



>Early relational trauma, deeply embedded in the individual’s core identity, frequently requires this depth of work, participation, and experience.

>A final note on suicidal feelings. Perhaps one of the most powerful set of experiences that the analyst is likely to meet relate to the patient’s suicidal thoughts, impulses, and feelings. These naturally cause concern and alarm, and sometimes therapists attempt to proscribe them, drawing up some kind of contract whereby the patient agrees not to attempt suicide whilst they are in therapy. Yet suicidal ideation in one form or another is almost universal amongst individuals who have experienced profound early relational trauma. I have come to recognise that suicidal thoughts and wishes are not only a frequent reaction to the experience of annihilation, whereby the patient takes their experience of annihilation into their own sphere of omnipotence, but also that they are integral to the experience of collapse and submission (the “death” of the ego), as well as a form of comfort whereby the knowledge that the person could and would kill themselves if they had to has allowed them to continue to bear their terrible experiences. They are also frequently related to significant experience with a caregiver who was suicidal (as described in Chapter Ten for Michael). 

>Being wrong and being thought of as bad are two of the most painful experiences for human beings, evoking shame and primitive fears of rejection by the parents or exclusion from the social group. Fitting in with and accommodating to the caregivers are thus hardwired into the brain—it is no surprise that we have dedicated mirror neurones (Gallese, 2001; Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2008) that allow us to identify with and anticipate what our caregivers are wanting and feeling.

>In the metaphor of Orpheus and Eurydice, the patient has descended into a torturous hell and has little or no hope of rescue.

>As Bromberg puts it, “the analyst is communicating both his ongoing concern for his patient’s affective safety and his commitment to the value of the inevitably painful process of reliving” (Bromberg, 2011, p. 17, original italics). To avoid the trauma altogether could be seen as a dereliction of the analyst’s duty of care, as it takes a short-term, “easy” path at the expense of the patient’s long- term development and continued suffering.

>the more primitive and foundational the experience, the more it has to be actualised and lived through in the analytic relationship 

>It was as if her early experience of despair was being presented to us time and again until we could finally face it directly, contain it, manage it, and thereby detoxify it.

>grieved for idealised solutions to those traumas. 

>One of the reasons that the wish for a conflict-free relationship is so powerful and significant is that it represents the struggle/attempt to be in touch with one’s core self. Traumatic experiences lie at the individual’s core, and the dissociation from the trauma, and its subsequent avoidance, represents an alienation from one’s core self. Therefore it is only safe enough to approach that core if the individual can bear, or has worked through, the trauma (for example, risking being criticised where once this was intolerable due to the early experience of a critical parent), or if there is no risk of retraumatisation—something which almost always requires an idealised solution.
>
>Thus, if the traumatic complex is worked through there is a double benefit in that the individual can accept, and is reunited with, their core self—something which they have been divided against, feeling that they are unacceptable, blaming themselves for being anxious, or wanting to be someone else, or not to exist at all.
>
>However, if the individual requires an idealised solution, it only feels safe enough to be oneself if there is no risk of opposition (and thus potential annihilation). This is often experienced/expressed in terms of the search for a loving relationship where the lover will love and approve the individual’s (tentative, sensitive) self and thereby implicitly vouchsafe it. This will, in turn, allow the individual to safely and openly express that self, perhaps loving the lover in return (when this does not occur the individual feels betrayed and their reactions can be intense). 

>In Freudian terms this has much in common with the shift from the pleasure principle to the reality principle, and in Kleinian terms it has many similarities with the struggle to move towards the depressive position (see Chapter Eight). 

>The unfolding of the infant’s nascent core self, the process that Fordham called deintegration (1969), is vital but fragile, and when the reaching out is not received, or is rejected, it is experienced as annihilating. 

>Perhaps Fordham could have said something along the lines of what Jessica Benjamin said to her patient, as discussed in the last chapter, namely that, “no matter what she did, she would always have a place in my heart, that she could not break our attachment or destroy my loving feelings” (Benjamin, 2004, p. 37). 



>I suspect that this pain relates to the appalling isolation that comes when the people on whom you depend and to whom you want to reach out, feel too toxic to do so safely (this represents a disorganised attachment pattern)

>Freud’s relatively early paper, “Remembering, repeating and working-through” (1914g), recognised that the patient’s early relational conflicts are re-enacted and worked through in the transference–countertransference/analytic relationship.

>Winnicott’s classic “draft” paper, “Fear of Breakdown”, where he writes, “[t]he only way to ‘remember’ [the traumatic experience of breakdown] is for the patient to experience this past thing for the first time in the present, that is to say, in the transference. This past and future thing then becomes a matter of the here and now” (1974, p. 105). 



>“Slouching towards Bethlehem”, Nina Coltart (1986) poetically describes how the analyst’s attitude facilitates the birth of the “beast” that is slouching towards Bethlehem. This beast clearly represents the patient’s early object relations, those “beyond words” (p. 194), becoming constellated in the analytic process. 

>Betty Joseph’s paper, “Transference: the total situation” (Joseph, 1985), extends the analyst’s appreciation of what is being constellated in the analytic relationship to include implicit patterns of relating that have much greater significance and hold precedence over conscious ways of relating and verbal dialogues that may be constitute only the surface layer of the analytic dialogue. 

 

>Patient and analyst can have intellectual knowledge about the patient’s difficulties but what is most effective is when both patient and analyst “learn from experience” (Bion, 1962a). 

 

>*Analytic attitude and borderline psychology*
>
>The attitude of acceptance that I am advocating is especially pertinent to working with individuals with a borderline psychology, as they readily feel criticised and misunderstood and have an acute eye on whether the analyst is seeing things from their perspective; in other words, whether or not the analyst is identified with them. This is in part because they are frequently harshly critical of themselves and cannot properly understand why it is that they do what they do, and why they cannot do what they would like to be doing (frequently that is to fit in with and function “like everyone else”). This is an aspect of self-criticism/superego functioning derived from the universal, primitive functioning that monitors where we are in relation to others—so necessary to help us adapt to our caregivers, family group, and society. The more that ego-functioning is disrupted, the more that the individual’s core self is exposed, the greater will be their underlying need to mirror others or be mirrored by them. 

>Ron Britton understands this need for understanding and agreement in terms of the patient’s fear of “malignant misunderstanding”. He holds that those with “borderline disorder”, who he terms thin-skinned narcissists, keep their primary object as good (maintaining empathic understanding) through splitting. This engenders a third object, the father/analyst, who breaks up the relationship with the good object, who is feared to be the source of malignant misunderstanding. This is experienced as an attack, which threatens not only the loss of the good object but the patient’s integrity itself and an ensuing collapse into states of chaos and terror. This chaos he links with Bion’s (1959, p. 107) understanding of the ego-destructive superego (Britton, 1998, pp. 54–57). Britton writes: “the need for agreement is inversely proportional to the expectation of understanding” (p. 57). He understands this dynamic, then, very much in terms of the “Oedipus situation”.
>
>Whilst he acknowledges the contribution of trauma for these individuals, referencing Rosenfeld, he concludes that there is also an innate factor for some individuals, “a kind of psychic atopia, a hypersensitivity to psychic difference, an allergy to the products of other minds” (p. 58, original italics). This is also one of the phenomena he understands in terms of narcissism as “a force or innate tendency within the personality that opposes relationships outside the self” (Britton, 2004, p. 478, original italics). This “allergy to the products of other minds” very much echoes Fordham’s (1974) understanding of defences of the self. Britton describes this as like the sensitivity of the body’s immune system and that “[w]here this sensitivity is considerable what is required in the way of understanding is perfect understanding. Less than perfect understanding might therefore be perceived as misunderstanding” (Britton, 1998, p. 58, original italics).

>ego-functioning cannot be repaired until the trauma is worked through, which requires that the trauma is recognised and understood.

>In regard to separation, Steiner describes how, for the patient to emerge from their psychic retreat in order to face psychic reality, requires the “relinquishment of the object and an experience of separateness from it, [where] … the reality of dependence on the object has to be acknowledged and then the reality of the loss of the object has to be faced in order for mourning to be worked through, and both are often vehemently resisted” (1996, p. 1076). I see the mourning as, in large part, the individual being able to relinquish and mourn for the ideal, non-traumatising childhood being instituted in the present. Separation also requires working through the profound experience of the collapse and submit response, which thus constitutes a repair of their ego-functioning (see Chapters Fourteen and Fifteen). 

 

>The traumatic roots of these idealised, oedipal configurations were only too easy to see in her perennial experience of exclusion by both her mother, due to her mother’s extreme anxiety and nervous withdrawal, and her father, who was also a frightening, angry, depressed, and dissatisfied presence. We had frequently discussed things in these oedipal terms, which was of some help in addressing her idealisation. 



>I am very much aware, therefore, that the analyst’s way of being with the patient—when, how, and in what way they respond, what silences they leave, their tone of voice and so on—is absolutely key to the analytic process. Furthermore, that in being relational, the analytic relationship is the essential site for the reconstruction and re-enactment of early relational patterns. The relationship will inevitably trigger and give access to the original traumas. It is therefore of the utmost importance that the analyst is alert to what their way of being with the patient is triggering at any particular moment, and that they explore that as a matter of priority. 

>At some point the patient will need to return to the trauma of people “not wanting to have anything to do with me”, to work it through. As Winnicott says, “there is no end … unless the thing feared has been experienced” (1974, p. 105). It is only too easy for the patient to feel that the analyst cannot really bear to confront the depth of the despair that they experience over this issue and thus to feel confirmed that “no one would want anything to do with me as I really am”, and thus feel alienated from themselves through what feels like an unbearable truth. Individuals with a borderline psychology are less able to gloss over the real trauma anyway, as it is so powerful and disruptive of ego- functioning. To quote Bromberg again: “… the analytic relationship … allows the painful reliving of early trauma, without the reliving being just a blind repetition of the past” (Bromberg, 2011, pp. 16–17). 

>What I believe is corrective and new, as many have said before (e.g., Casement, 2001), is for the patient to be known, accepted, and “accompanied”, and for their early relational traumas to be experientially known about (perhaps for the first time) and appreciated. 

>As I described with Michael in Chapter Ten, the analytic relationship is built upon both analyst and patient being able to remain true to their separate selves and their primitive responses. It is a relationship that is built on this “realness”, and as such it engenders the deepest respect of, and appreciation for, the other. 

>Shame is not like other affects. It is a global affect that colours the individual’s core sense of self, so that the person does not just feel that they have done something bad or wrong, but rather that they are bad or wrong. 

>Mollon writes that the birth of shame lies in “not being able to evoke an empathic response in the other” (Mollon, 2002, p. 26; quoted in Knox, 2013, p. 499). Shame is a key factor in the individual getting stuck in states of regression. 

>Jacoby (1996) cites Aristotle and suggests that there are two forms of shame, one form serving social adaptation, the other personal integrity. He gives the following example:
>
>>I may be too ashamed to express my dissenting opinion in a group for fear of being laughed at, rejected, or not taken seriously. But as soon as I arrive home, I am ready to “kill myself” for shame for having been such a coward, so incapable of standing up for myself. I lose self-respect because I did not stand up for what is true for me—indeed, I may have even denied it. (p. 22) 

>Lewis (1990) describes “feeling traps” where the individual feels ashamed of feeling ashamed or enraged and ashamed of feeling enraged. These are intense states of shame that spiral in intensity making the agonising experience of shame ever more intolerable; Herman describes this as shame “feeding upon itself” (2011, p. 163). 

>Understanding these most primitive, disturbing reactions, which are out of the everyday realm of experience, entails some psycho-education in the same way that the analyst might name and normalise what someone is feeling who has been hitherto cut off from their emotions. The subsequent, more challenging task is in bearing with the patient whilst they live these feelings through and, particularly, as they live them through in relation to the analyst. Thus, with Sarah we had to go on to live through experiences where she felt I expected her now to be alright and to know what to do, just as her father had expected of her. We also had to work through her conflict about being dependent on me as her mother had been on her, feeling that it was at the same time wrong, natural, expected, and inevitable; there was an allied fear that I would get fed up with her, just as she feared others would.

>Winnicott gathers these phenomena together under the term “breakdown”, an “unthinkable state of affairs” where there is “the breakdown of the establishment of the unit self” (Winnicott, 1974, p. 103). He describes the “primitive agonies” associated with this state as a return to an unintegrated state, falling forever, failure to remain embodied (depersonalisation), a loss of the sense of being real, and a loss of the capacity to relate to objects (p. 104). He also links the experience of emptiness and non-existence, and the fear of death, to this “syndrome”. 

>I mostly agree with Winnicott when he says, echoing Ferenczi, that “the only way to ‘remember’ in this case is for the patient to experience this past thing for the first time in the present, that is to say, in the transference” (p. 105). Living the experience through in the transference is one element of working through the traumatic complex, getting to know it, understand it, bear it, and no longer live in terror of it; 

>In her classic paper, Betty Joseph (1982) describes a clinical picture where,
>
>>in their external lives these patients get more and more absorbed into hopelessness and involved in activities that seem destined to destroy them physically as well as mentally … . in all these patients the place where the pull towards near-death is most obvious is in the transference … . they may speak in a way which seems calculated to communicate or create despair and a sense of hopelessness in themselves and in the analyst, although apparently wanting understanding. It is not just that they make progress, forget it, lose it or take no responsibility for it. … The pull towards despair and death in such patients is not … a longing for peace and freedom from effort … . There is a felt need to know and to have the satisfaction of seeing oneself being destroyed. 

 

>I have described above how Nounoushka’s tyrannical, bullying father intruded into every area of her life, trying to control everything that she did and punishing her verbally, and frequently with physical violence, if she did not comply. Similarly her anxious, distant mother used Nounoushka to bolster her own sense of self and to counter her insecurity, whilst not standing up for Nounoushka in the face of her husband’s near obsessional control of their daughter.
>
>Nounoushka was desperate to try to please both her “dismissive” (in terms of attachment styles), controlling father, who was himself highly anxious and hypochondriacal, and her needy, insecure mother. Nounoushka’s submission was therefore both required as a matter of self-preservation with her violent father, who would brook no opposition—he might literally have killed her on a number of occasions, even if “accidentally”—and in the hope of pleasing her anxious and unavailable mother. For Nounoushka there was a massive split between her fear of her hateful, abusive father (or anything she experienced like him), her unavailable, unresponsive mother (and anything she experienced like her), and a longed-for, idealised, loving, rescuer figure, as she had hoped her mother or I might be.

>Inevitably she was frequently anxious that I would get fed up with her, think she was a burden, or be critical and rejecting towards her in any way. She was vigilant (in a paranoid way) for the slightest hint of rejection or displeasure in me. 

>After a time I became more able to name her underlying fears straight out, for example, that she was at that moment fearing that I’d be disgusted with her and would reject her, rather than hedging around with confusing dialogues about whether I was saying, meaning, feeling, or thinking whatever it was she feared. In being able to face, name, and discuss the traumas and link them to her early experiences rather than seeking to avoid them, they became more manageable.
>
>These traumas were frequently triggered in and by the relationship with me, and it was vital that we could identify what I had done or said, or not done and not said, that was evoking these responses in her. In this way we began to work through her traumatic complex, although I will return to the question of reassurance further below.

>This also became manifest in a terror that she would not be able to breathe or swallow, or that she would vomit. We linked this in part to her terrified, freeze reaction, which constricted her breathing; to her grandmother forbidding her to cry when her parents went away so that her feelings became terrifyingly bottled up in her throat; and to her father’s hostility and disgust if she ever vomited. 

>This also relates to what Britton (quoted above) says about the deathwish not being intended to separate but to end all separation, so that the individual can no longer be attacked by a separate other. Under the conditions of her early life it made good sense, if she could not be “perfectly good” and beyond criticism, and if the other (and that now included me) was not perfectly (“ideally”) trustworthy, to “suspend her own idiom”, remove herself from the possibility of opposition and “kill herself off” rather than face being assailed further. With her intense shame militating against her “standing up” and “being herself” she was therefore trapped in this oppressed, powerless position, highly sensitised to what I may think or feel towards her. These are clearly characteristics of what Kleinians would call the paranoid-schizoid position.
>
>Similarly, in reversed mode, I could sometimes feel oppressed and trapped by the concern about triggering her suicidal impulses. For example, she might become anxious towards the end of a session and, when there was no time to explore her question in any other way, she might ask whether I found her a burden. I was faced with offering reassurance, or recognising the truth of what she was requiring us to live through (that such exchanges were, on the superficial level, “a burden”), or saying that I was not going to answer her question and explore it the next session—at which she might return to knock on my door a few minutes later to tell me that she would certainly not survive. 

>I had to recognise that my responses or lack of responses absolutely triggered the retraumatisations, but I came to trust that these were all developments in the analytic relationship that were arising at a time when the relationship could now contain them. Over time, we each had to develop both the range of experiences we could bear, and understand the context and dynamics of those affective and somatic experiences. I see this as the essential process of the analysis, which itself represented the development of the relationship, the development of each of us individually, and the progress of the analysis. Understanding the process in the terms I have described served as an important container for this experience.

>Every expression of Nounoushka’s wish to kill herself contained a three-pronged question/relational dilemma: “Do you care enough to rescue me, are you so heartless as to let me die, or are you so murderous that you want me dead?” In other words, which side of the (three-way) split are you on: rescuer, passive bystander, or abuser (Gabbard, 1992, 1997; Karpman, 1968)? 

>Relinquishing the ideal was a significant aspect of our work. As Davies and Frawley put it, “[a]cknowledging the impossibility of bringing this fantasy [of a new and idealized, compensatory childhood] to realization represents a betrayal of [the patient’s] most sacred inner self” (1992a, p. 25). A significant amount of her depression, despair, and hopelessness was related to this, often focused on her wish for a “cure”. Exploring the wish for this cure felt taboo for quite some time, but we were eventually able to see how it also contained a wish for an ideal world where there would be no opposition, as well as for “rescue”, obviating the need for her to face the shame and difficulty of manifesting herself. Manifesting herself/incarnating is, of course, the only way of building self-agency—an essential and central aspect of egofunctioning (Knox, 2010). 



>I have found on a number of occasions that when the patient’s experiences of annihilation, breakdown, and fragmentation have been early, prolonged, intense, and thus foundational, they have needed to be reconstructed and lived through in this way. Such highly toxic/ poisonous experiences need precisely to be lived through and contained by and within the analytic relationship in order for them to be detoxified.
>
>This process of jointly living through the powerlessness, defeat, collapse, and death related to the collapse response exemplifies the process that Jung (1946/54) described in “The psychology of the transference” in relation to the alchemical treatise The Rosarium Philosophorum. There he describes how the analytic couple go through various stages from an initial stage of confusion and darkness (nigredo), followed by a mixing of the individual personalities in joint experience (solutio and coniunctio), followed by the experience of death (putrefacto), stages of abstraction (ascent of the soul), purification (albedo and ablutio), and incarnation (rubedo—reddening), before a release from the traumatic complex and the “rebirth” in a new form (Fabricius, 1976; Jung, 1946/54).
>
>There was one further, key element related to her desperate search for reassurance that was required for her to be released from the traumatic complex. Her father’s reactions to her in particular, had had a profound impact and she was (understandably) hypervigilant to what the other was thinking and feeling towards her. In her “exposed” place, related to the collapse response, she reached out all the more powerfully for reassurance from the other. This way of being was reinforced (and presumably to some extent instituted) by her father’s near-obsession with what Nounoushka was thinking and feeling towards him, to which he, in turn, had had powerful responses.
>
>Ultimately she came to recognise that this “dependency”, as she put it, on what the other person was thinking and feeling towards her was a dead end that itself had to be relinquished. This required that the traumatic complex’s power had lessened so that she was no longer held in its thrall, but also that she recognised that my reassurance was not the solution. This is the situation of the child who has become “clingy” through traumatising interactions with the parent(s) and desperately seeks for this to be “undone” by good experience. 
>
>Whilst, at the right time, the “gleam in the mother’s eye” helps the child construct a positive, viable sense of themselves, as Kohut (1971) and Winnicott assert, the child needs to be able to move on to going about their own business, released from an absolute dependence on the mother’s approval (and hopefully secure in the mother’s good-enough feelings, as well as able to deal with her ambivalent feelings). In the end this leads to recognising that the mother is a separate individual in her own right whose feelings towards the person as an adult have only a limited effect. For me this demonstrates the limitation of any relational approach that aims to counter the patient’s negative self-feeling primarily through the analyst’s positive disposition.

>dissociative identity disorder (DID), which used to be known as multiple personality disorder, which is one of the psyche’s responses to profound, prolonged, and inescapable early trauma, usually involving one or both parents. When those to whom the child would naturally turn for protection are the source of greatest danger, violation, and abuse the psyche instigates profound structural defences. 

 >For a more in-depth understanding I would refer you to excellent books by Valerie Sinason (2002), Phil Mollon (1996), Elizabeth Howell (2011), Richard Kluft (2013), or the definitive book by Onno van der Hart, Ellert Nijenhuis, and Kathy Steel (2006), The Haunted Self: Structural Dissociation and the Treatment of Chronic Traumatization, as well as the International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation’s “Guidelines for treating dissociative identity disorder in adults” (2011). 

>the proper information processing and storage of information in narrative (explicit) memory … . The traumatized individual is left in a state of “speechless terror” in which words fail to describe what has happened. … Janet proposed that traumatic memories are split off (dissociated) from consciousness, and instead are stored as sensory perceptions, obsessional ruminations, or behavioral reenactments. (van der Kolk, 1996b, p. 286) 

 >The core of the self cannot bear too much intrusion or impingement and, when the individual cannot escape from the threat, collapse and dissociation occurs. 

 

>When the child cannot escape the threat, the ego-complex itself may split, forming discrete, autonomous, reality-orienting, ego fragments called “apparently normal parts of the personality” (ANPs), which allow the person to continue to orient and adapt themselves to their situation and the world. 

>The person is often deeply ashamed of these experiences, as not to know your own mind, what you think or believe, or what is/was reality, makes life extremely precarious. In addition, there is the intense shame about “not being like other people”. The person may very well try to disguise such “shameful” reactions, which may also mean that it takes longer to understand what is going on, particularly if the analyst has not had previous experience with someone with DID.

>As I mentioned above, the analytic relationship will inevitably trigger many of the original traumas as it involves matters of trust and safety as well as, more basically, the challenge of being in the same room with another person and communicating with them. 

 >For these reasons, as well as the shame associated with “being like this”, the patient will do a great deal of, often unconscious, testing of the analyst to assess if they are able to work in the way that is needed with the parts, as well as to gauge their response to the fierce, protector parts. The analyst must learn to respect these protector parts and the role they play in helping the patient manage.
 >
 >To reiterate, people with DID may present like anyone else, functioning through their apparently normal parts for a long time before the analyst becomes aware of the presence of the emotional parts. A history of severe trauma should alert the analyst to the possibility of a dissociative identity disorder, and experience of working with someone with DID will make the signs clearer; for example, suddenly becoming completely flooded by an intense response and it being as if that is “the whole picture”, or feeling completely alienated from vulnerable experiences that have been explored before and which now feel unreal or, more mundanely, being unable to remember or relate to what took place in the previous session. 

>Shame is an incredibly important factor for the patient with DID, and the person, and certain parts in particular, are likely to feel a great deal of shame about being seen or known 

>For a very accessible book that opens up many different perspectives I particularly recommend: A Shining Affliction: A Story of Harm and Healing in Psychotherapy (Rogers 1995). 

>The work of many trauma therapists—van der Kolk, Herman, Levine, Rothschild, Siegel, Ogden, Minton, Pain, van der Hart, Nijenehuis and Steele—and neuroscientists—LeDoux, Damasio, Panksepp, and Schore 

>main authorities on trauma work whom I have quoted extensively in this book—Bessel van der Kolk and the sensorimotor approach of Pat Ogden, Kekuni Minton, and Clare Pain 

 

 >Bridging the gap between the verbal psychotherapies and the body psychotherapies means taking the best resources from both, rather than choosing one over the other. Integrated trauma therapy must consider, consist of, and utilize tools for identifying, understanding, and treating trauma’s effects on both mind a body. Language is necessary for both. The somatic disturbances of trauma require language to make sense of them, comprehend their meaning, extract their message, and resolve their impact. When healing trauma, it is crucial to give attention to both body and mind; you can’t have one without the other. (2000, pp. xiii–xiv) 

 >My developing understanding is that it is the analyst’s attitude and the analytic relationship itself that is the primary way in which the patient’s experience and distress is met and regulated. Recognising the person’s experience, staying with them while they struggle with it and verbalise what they can, being affected by this experience and recognising those effects, making sense of it with them where possible, and putting that sense into words where necessary, is the core of the interactive regulation that goes on between infant and parent as well as between adults (Beebe & Lachmann, 2002, 2013; Bion, 1962a). I have found that this attitude is almost always sufficient within the analytic session itself. As Michael (Chapter Ten) told me once, the analytic thinking and interpretation was essential in helping him to see what was going on.
 >
 >I have come to recognise however, as I work more deeply with peoples’ affective-somatic fragments of experience and states of mind, that when they are re-experiencing and reliving their early traumas, for example, experiencing states of annihilation, they invariably reach the limits of what they find bearable. This is particularly the case between sessions, perhaps reinforced by the fact that they have come to find that their interaction with the analyst has down-regulated their distress and thus the separation from the analyst at the end of the sessions is experienced as a more frightening and disturbing loss. 

>Other than to let them know of this technique I have not found it helpful to take charge of or direct the regulation of the patient’s experience for a number of reasons. The primary one is the paramount importance of the patient’s autonomy, which I see as in some way sacrosanct. This is particularly so with patients who have been traumatically controlled, violated, or abused, or told what or what not to do and how to behave, which is so characteristic of early relational trauma. 

>A secondary consideration, also of vital importance, is that in adopting a “helpful” role, the analyst may be setting up an expectation that they are taking up an idealised, saviour/rescuer role, and that they will continue to do so; this is doomed, ultimately, to fail (see Chapters Nine and Eleven) 

>Or again, the patient can become drawn into having to reassure the therapist that they are good and effective in a similar way to which they had to reassure a parent, who had in some way catastrophically let them down—that they were good/likeable/loveable and that they hadn’t done anything wrong. Jean Knox (2007) documents a good example of this in her paper, “The fear of love: the denial of self in relationship”, where she describes an individual’s struggle with parents who could not tolerate emotional separation as they wanted to maintain a perfect, loving contingency with their son (see also Benjamin, 2004, and my comments on that paper in Chapter Eleven). 

>Joyce McDougal. McDougal (1989) calls on the work of Freud, Klein, Winnicott, and Bion to explore “the unconscious significance of psychosomatic manifestations and to examine the extent to which these are linked to the vicissitudes involved in becoming a person and to failures of the internalisation processes by which individual identity is constructed” (p. 48). 

>There are often experiences of anxiety, disgust, or self-loathing in relation to certain parts of the body or certain bodily functions, for example, a fear of being sick. Exploration has come to reveal that the body has been holding experiences of intrusion or violation, or sometimes reflects a parent’s particular disgust of the child’s bodily needs or bodily functions—perhaps the parent found the child’s physical needs or their wish for physical affection repulsive. 

>The grounding technique that I tell people about is taken from Frances Sommer Anderson and Eric Sherman (2007, 2013), who worked with Dr. Sarno. She describes it by the acronym EGO, where the individual exhales slowly and allows their body to initiate inhaling; grounds themself where they are sitting, receiving the support of the chair and the floor beneath their feet; and orients themselves to their environment by looking around and about them. This decreases activation of the sympathetic nervous system and helps the individual to come out of their hyperaroused state. 

>Whilst I have quoted Ogden, Minton, and Pain’s work on sensorimotor therapy at some length, there is also a rich vein of Jungian body therapy, based on the work of Marion Woodman who developed what she called BodySoul Rhythms. Marian Dunlea, Wendy Bratherton3 and others, have taken Marion Woodman’s work forward and explore psyche and soma together in their BodySoul and BodyDreaming programmes. This involves listening to the somatic unconscious and paying attention to unfolding dreams. In this way, guided by the self, space is provided for the unconscious to emerge through movement, voice, painting, and clay work. This enables the freeing up of the complexes held within the body. Their work also draws on Levine’s somatic experiencing, attachment theory, and the emerging research from the field of neuroscience, some of which I have outlined already. Through personal experience of their therapies I can vouch for their effectiveness. 



>Jung’s Red Book 

>I think this is a relatively common experience of teenage years—the first experience of reflexive self-consciousness, where the person becomes properly conscious of themselves for the first time. I remember the experience of emerging from just such a mist myself.

>one cannot control what one thinks and feels 

>the individual can come to acknowledge the source of the unacceptable thoughts and feelings, for example, of anger, hatred, or envy, as within themselves, and develop some kind of attitude towards them, owning them and steering them in a constructive direction when they arise. 

>In a fascinating book Tsultrim Allione (2008) describes the ancient Buddhist practice of Chöd, where the individual learns to “feed” the “demons” of which they are terrified, rather than avoiding them—an example of the kind of submission and self-sacrifice I am discussing. 

>unless you really face the traumatic experiences and work them through, the interim solutions are not satisfactory and the original situations keep re-presenting themselves. 



>Working through a traumatic complex involves embracing both sides of the traumatic experience—the internal working models in direct and reversed forms—a coming to terms with the traumatic experience itself (being subject to it in direct form) and the way the individual may be re-enacting the trauma on others (reversed form). This means achieving some kind of acceptance of the reality of the experiences, against the great pressures and defences to move away from them into an idealised, other world (the luminous tree in the clifftop city). Early traumatic experiences were originally unbearable and, in so far as they haven’t been worked on, they remain so. The process requires working on what feels impossible. 

>Do we need to go into the darkest places? I know of no one who hasn’t challenged this at some point in the analysis, including me as the analyst. When I am in the role of analyst (rather than tthhaatt ooff ppatient), I travel hopefully—”perhaps it won’t be necessary this time …”—yet I have found time and again that the person’s psyche is intent on taking us there and I have come to appreciate the wisdom in that. As Jung writes:
>
>>a complex can be really overcome only if it is lived out to the full. In other words, if we are to develop further, we have to draw to us and drink down to the very dregs what, because of our complexes, we have held at a distance. (Jung, 1938/1954, pp. 96–99) This point is reinforced by Winnicott who writes: “… there is no end unless the bottom of the trough has been reached, unless the thing feared has been experienced” (1974, p. 105, original italics).
>
>Vitally, when patient and analyst live through the later version of the original relational trauma, something is freed up and the analysis moves on. I have known many people who have had an apparently successful analysis, but their core relational traumas have been inadequately addressed and they have come to haunt the individual, in one form or another, later on. I have conducted such analyses myself and realise that I have sadly let those patients down. Developing the individual’s ego-functioning is a necessary part of working things through, but it is not sufficient. 
>
 >The traumatic experience is able to be borne, and the traumatic complex worked through, by analyst and patient addressing the trauma, the primitive defences against it, and the trauma-related internal working models on all levels and in direct and reversed forms, including the way they have become embodied in both the patient, the analyst, and the analytic relationship. This amounts to a significant development and broadening of both individuals’ identities, as they come to be able to recognise, bear, and integrate feelings of loss, abuse, shame, fragmentation, failure, death, and despair (to name just a few of the likely experiences and affects). 

 

 >The analyst’s task in orienting the individual towards facing their traumatic experiences and accompanying them on their journey, and by their involvement themselves becoming part of that journey, is invaluable. As Anne Alvarez writes of her work with children, “when a child sees that someone other than himself gets it, as it were, I think we do witness the ‘dyadically expanded states of consciousness’ which Tronick describes (Tronick et al., 1998)” (Alvarez, 2010, p. 871); or, to paraphrase Daniel Stern (1985/1998, p. 32), to know that someone is intent on knowing you as you really are offers the most profound experience of being understood and accepted. For their part, the analyst, in being challenged to face, embody, and use the most primitive aspects of their personality and, indeed, to engage their whole self, is also enlivened, enriched, and encouraged to be real. I know of no greater experience that one person can have with another.
