---
published: true
layout: post
image: /images/posts/CodependentNoMore.jpg
title: Codependent No More
---
> One fairly common denominator was having a relationship, personally or professionally, with troubled, needy, or dependent people. But a second, more common denominator seemed to be the unwritten, silent rules that usually develop in the immediate family and set the pace for relationships.8

> These rules prohibit discussion about problems; open expression of feelings; direct, honest communication; realistic expectations, such as being human, vulnerable, or imperfect; selfishness; trust in other people and one’s self; playing and having fun; and rocking the delicately balanced family canoe through growth or change—however healthy and beneficial that movement might be.

> Defining the problem is important because it helps determine the solution.
> So, here is my definition of a codependent: A codependent person is one who has let another person’s behavior affect him or her, and who is obsessed with controlling that person’s behavior.
> These behaviors can sabotage relationships that may otherwise have worked. These behaviors can prevent us from finding peace and happiness with the most important person in our lives—ourselves. These behaviors belong to the only person each of us can control—the only person we can change—ourselves.
> As counselor Scott Egleston says, codependency is a way of getting needs met that doesn’t get needs met.
> Judi Hollis wrote of detachment in a section on codependency in her book Fat Is a Family Affair. There she described detachment as “a healthy neutrality.”4
> How do we detach? How do we extricate our emotions, mind, body, and spirit from the agony of entanglement? As best we can. And, probably, a bit clumsily at first. An old A.A. and Al-Anon saying suggests a three-part formula called “HOW”: Honesty, Openness, and Willingness to try.7
> way—in spite of your unsolved Visualize your hands placing in God’s hands the person or problem you are concerned about.9 Visualize His hands gently and lovingly holding that person or willingly accepting that problem. Now, visualize His hands holding you. All is well for the moment. All is as it should be and as it needs to be. All will be well—better than you think.
> We don’t have to take things so seriously (ourselves, events, and other people). We blow things out of proportion—our feelings, thoughts, actions, and mistakes. We do the same thing with other people’s feelings, thoughts, and actions. We tell ourselves things are awful, terrible, a tragedy, and the end of the world. Many things might be sad, too bad, and unpleasant—but the only thing that’s the end of the world is the end of the world. Feelings are important, but they’re only feelings. Thoughts are important, but they’re only thoughts—and we all think a lot of different things, and our thoughts are subject to change. What we say and do is important, what others say and do is important, but the world doesn’t hinge on any particular speech or action. And if it is particularly important that something gets done or said, don’t worry: It’ll happen. Lighten up. Give yourself and others room to move, to talk, to be who they are—to be human. Give life a chance to happen. Give yourself an opportunity to enjoy it.
>Study the Karpman Drama Triangle,” he said. The Karpman Drama Triangle and the accompanying roles of rescuer, persecutor, and victim, are the work and observation of Stephen B. Karpman.1
> Here’s another illustration of a rescue. One summer, a friend wanted me to take her to an apple farm. Originally, I wanted to go, and we set a date. By the time that date came, however, I was extremely busy. I called her, and instead of telling her I didn’t want to go, I asked to postpone it. I felt guilty and responsible for her feelings—another rescue on the way. I couldn’t disappoint her because I thought she couldn’t handle or be responsible for her feelings. I couldn’t tell the truth, because I thought she might be angry with me—more emotional responsibility—as if someone else’s anger is my business.
>cost.” Colette Dowling wrote about this thought pattern in The Cinderella Complex. Penelope Russianoff discussed it in Why Do I Think I’m Nothing
>I cannot, for some reason, find it within myself to face the aloneness that every human being must face or continue to run from: that of being ultimately and solely responsible for taking care of myself. I don’t believe I can take care of myself. I’m not sure I want to. I need a person, any person, to buffer the shock of my solitary condition. No matter what the cost.”
>Whether codependents appear fragile and helpless, or sturdy and powerful, most of us are frightened, needy, vulnerable children who are aching and desperate to be loved and cared for.
>This child in us believes we are unlovable and will never find the comfort we are seeking; sometimes this vulnerable child becomes too desperate.
>We have been there for so many people. Most of us desperately want someone to finally be there for us. We need someone, anyone, to rescue us from the stark loneliness, alienation, and pain. We want some of the good stuff, and the good stuff is not in us. Pain is in us. We feel so helpless and uncertain. Others look so powerful and assured. We conclude the magic must be in them.
>we become dependent on them. We can bedependent on lovers, spouses, friends, parents, or our children. We become dependent on their approval. We become dependent on their presence. We become dependent on their need for us. We become dependent on their love, even though we believe we will never receive their love; we believe we are unlovable and nobody has ever loved us in a way that met our needs.
>The magic is in others, not us, we believe. The good feelings are in them, not us. The less good stuff we find in ourselves, the more we seek it in others. They have it all; we have nothing. Our existence is not important. We have been abandoned and neglected so often that we also abandon ourselves.
>Why, when we are experts at taking care of everybody around us, do we doubt our ability to take care of ourselves? What is it about us?
>Many of us learned these things because when we were children, someone very important to us was unable to give us the love, approval, and emotional security we needed. So we’ve gone about our lives the best way we could, still looking vaguely or desperately for something we never got. Some of us are still beating our heads against the cement trying to get this love from people who, like Mother or Father, are unable to give what we need. The cycle repeats itself until it is interrupted It’s called unfinished business.
>Stop looking for happiness in other people. Our source of happiness and well-being is not inside others; it’s inside us. Learn to center ourselves in ourselves.
>We can learn to depend on ourselves. Maybe other people haven’t been there for us, but we can start being there for us. Stop abandoning ourselves, our needs, our wants, our feelings, our lives, and everything that comprises us. Make a commitment to always be there for ourselves. We can trust ourselves. We can handle and cope with the events, problems, and feelings life throws our way. We can trust our feelings and our judgments. We can solve our problems. We can learn to live with our unsolved problems, too. We must trust the people we are learning to depend upon—ourselves.
>In The Cinderella Complex, Colette Dowling suggested doing this with an attitude of “courageous vulnerability.”8 That means: You feel scared, but you do it anyway.
>The situation wasn’t ideal, but I could get through it if I stayed calm and worked with what was available.
>You can get through dark situations, too. You can take care of yourself and trust yourself. Trust God. Go as far as you can see, and by the time you get there, you’ll be able to see farther. It’s called One Day at a Time.
>We don’t have to punish ourselves by feeling guilty to prove to God or anyone else how much we care.7
>The love we give and receive will be enhanced by the love we give ourselves.
>Accepting reality is touted and encouraged by most sane people. It is the goal of many therapies, as well it should be. Facing and coming to terms with what is is a beneficial act. Acceptance brings peace. It is frequently the turning point for change. It is also much easier said than done.
>Love must also have compassion which means to bear with or to suffer with a person.
>Perhaps the most painful loss many codependents face is the loss of our dreams, the hopeful and sometimes idealistic expectations for the future that most people have. This loss can be the most difficult to accept.
>Betrayal can be overwhelming when someone we love does things that deeply hurt us.
>Acceptance is the ultimate paradox: we cannot change who we are until we accept ourselves the way we are.
>Here is an excerpt from Honoring the Self on selfacceptance: … If I can accept that I am who I am, that I feel what I feel, that I have done what I have done—if I can accept it whether I like all of it or not—then I can accept myself. I can accept my shortcomings, my self-doubts, my poor self-esteem. And when I can accept all that, I have put myself on the side of reality rather than attempting to fight reality. I am no longer twisting my consciousness in knots to maintain delusions about my present condition. And so I clear the road for the first steps of strengthening my self-esteem…. So long as we cannot accept the fact of what we are at any given moment of our existence, so long as we cannot permit ourselves fully to be aware of the nature of our choices and actions, cannot admit sciousness, we cannot change.5
>“In times of great stress, we shut down our awareness emotionally, sometimes intellectually, and occasionally physically,” explained Claudia L. Jewett in Helping Children Cope with Separation and Loss.
>Denial is the shock absorber for the soul. It is an instinctive and natural reaction to pain, loss, and change. It protects us. It wards off the blows of life until we can gather our other coping resources.
>John Powell in Why Am I Afraid To Tell You Who I Am?
>Hollis quoted Fritz Perls, the father of Gestalt therapy, in this manner: “The only way out is through.”12
>We try to control other people’s feelings. We don’t want to hurt people, we don’t want don’t want to offend them.
>The big reason for not repressing feelings is that emotional withdrawal causes us to lose our positive feelings. We lose the ability to feel. Sometimes, this may be a welcome relief if the pain becomes too great or too constant, but this is not a good plan for living. We may shut down our deep needs—our need to love and be loved—when we shut down our emotions. We may lose our ability to enjoy sex, the human touch. We lose the ability to feel close to people, otherwise known as intimacy. We lose our capacity to enjoy the pleasant things in life.
>if we don’t deal with our feelings we don’t change and we don’t grow. We stay stuck.
>It’s okay to feel our feelings. It’s okay for us to have feelings—all of them. It’s even okay for men to feel. Feelings are not wrong. They’re not inappropriate. We don’t need to feel guilty about feelings. Feelings are not acts; feeling homicidal rage is entirely different from committing homicide. Feelings shouldn’t be judged as either good or bad. Feelings are emotional energy; they are not personality traits.
>we are not responsible for anyone else’s feelings, although we are responsible for choosing to be considerate of people’s feelings.
>etiquette requires that when you discuss a feeling with someone, you say, “I feel such and such when you do such and such because …” not “You made me feel …”6
>if we want an intimate relationship with someone, we need to discuss our persistent feelings with him or her. It’s called emotional honesty.
>Many codependents believe happy feelings must always be followed by sad feelings, because that is the way it has usually happened in the past. Some codependents believe we can’t, shouldn’t, and don’t deserve to feel happy. Sometimes we do things to create sad feelings after experiencing happy feelings, or whenever the possibility of a happy feeling exists. It’s okay to feel happy. It’s okay to feel sad. Let the emotional energy pass through, and strive for peace and balance.
>Remember, decisions don’t have to be made perfectly. We don’t have to be perfect. We don’t even have to be nearly perfect. We can just be who we are. We can make mistakes in our choices. We’re not so fragile we can’t handle making a mistake. It’s no big deal! It’s part of living. We can learn from our mistakes, or we can simply make another decision.
>Our thoughts are keys to our feelings. Our feelings are keys to our thoughts. We don’t have to repress. We need to let the thoughts and feelings pass through, then figure out what we need to do to take care of ourselves.
>Believe that life is worth living and your belief will create the fact. Be not afraid to live. —WILLIAM JAMES
>“Success requires heart and soul effort and you can only put your heart and soul into something you really desire.”1
>Our communication reeks of repressed feelings, repressed thoughts, ulterior motives, low self-worth, and shame.
>Codependents are indirect. We don’t say what we mean, we don’t mean what we say.2 We don’t do it on purpose. We do it because we’ve learned to communicate this way. At some point, either in our childhood or adult family, we learned it was wrong to talk about problems, express feelings, and express opinions. We’ve learned it was wrong to directly state what we want and need. It was certainly wrong to say no, and stand up for ourselves.
>John Powell asks in the title of his excellent book on communication: Why Am I Afraid to Tell You Who I Am?
>I believe most of us are afraid to tell people who we are because we don’t believe it is okay to be who we are.
>Talking clearly and openly is not difficult. In fact, it’s easy. And fun. Start by knowing that who we are is okay. Our feelings and thoughts are okay. Our opinions count. It’s okay to talk about our problems. And it’s okay to say no. We can say no—whenever we want to. It’s easy. Say it right now. Ten times. See how easy that was? By the way, other people can say no, too. It makes it easier if we’ve got equal rights. Whenever our answer is no, start our response with the word no, instead of saying, “I don’t think so,” or “Maybe,” or some other wavering phrase.5 Say what we mean, and mean what we say. If we don’t know what we mean, be quiet and think about it. If our answer is, “I don’t know,” say “I don’t know.” Learn to be concise. Stop taking people all around the block. Get to the point and when we make it, stop. Talk about our problems. We’re not being disloyal to anyone by revealing who we are and what kinds of problems we’re working on. All we’re doing is pretending by not being who we are. Share secrets with trusted friends who won’t use these against us or help us feel ashamed. We can make appropriate decisions about who to talk to, how much to tell them, and when the best time to talk is. Express our feelings: openly, honestly, appropriately, and responsibly. Let others do the same. Learn the words: I feel. Let others say those words and learn to listen—not fix—when they do. We can say what we think. Learn to say: “This is what I think.” Our opinions can be different from other people’s opinions. That doesn’t mean we’re wrong. We don’t have to change our opinions, and neither does the other person, unless either of us wants to. We can even be wrong. We can say what we expect, without demanding that other people change to suit our needs. Other people can say what they expect, and we don’t have to change to suit them, either—if we don’t want to. We can express our wants and needs. Learn the words: “This is what I need from you. This is what I want from you.” We can tell the truth. Lying about what we think,
>We can tell the truth. Lying about what we think, how we feel, and what we want isn’t being polite— it’s lying. We don’t have to be controlled by what other people say; we don’t have to try to control them with our words and special effects. We don’t have to be manipulated, guilted, coerced, or forced into anything. We can open our mouths and take care of ourselves! Learn to say: “I love you, but I love me, too. This is what I need to do to take care of me.” We can, as Earnie Larsen says, learn to ignore nonsense. We can refuse to talk to someone’s illness, whether it is alcoholism or another compulsive disorder. If it doesn’t make sense, it doesn’t make sense. We don’t have to waste our time trying to make sense out of it or trying to convince the other person that what he or she said didn’t make sense. Learn to say, “I don’t want to discuss this.” We can be assertive and stand up for ourselves without being abrasive or aggressive. Learn to say: “This is as far as I go. This is my limit. I will not tolerate this.” And mean those words. We can show compassion and concern without rescuing. Learn to say, “Sounds like you’re having a problem. What do you need from me?” Learn to say, “I’m sorry you’re having that problem.” Then, let it go. We don’t have to fix it. We can discuss our feelings and problems withdon’t
>DRAMA ADDICTS Many codependents become what some people call drama or crises addicts. Strangely enough, problems can become addicting. If we live with enough misery, crises, and turmoil long enough, the fear and stimulation caused by problems can become a comfortable emotional experience. In her excellent book Getting Them Sober, Volume II, Toby Rice Drews refers to this feeling as “excited misery.”2 After a while, we can become so used to involving our emotions with problems and crises that we may get and stay involved with problems that aren’t our concern. We may even start making troubles or making troubles greater than they are to create stimulation for ourselves. This is especially true if we have greatly neglected our own lives and feelings. When we’re involved with a problem, we know we’re alive. When the problem is solved, we may feel empty and void of feeling. Nothing to do. Being in crisis becomes a comfortable place, and it saves us from our humdrum existence. It’s like getting addicted to soap operas, except the daily crises occur in our lives and the lives of our friends and family. “Will Ginny leave John?” “Can we save Herman’s job?” “How will Henrietta survive this dilemma?” After we have detached and begun minding our own business and our lives finally become serene, some codependents still occasionally crave a little of the old excitement. We may at times find our new way of life boring. We are just used to so much turmoil and excitement that peace seems bland at first. We’ll get used to it. As we develop our lives, set our goals, and find things to do that interest us, peace will become comfortable—more comfortable than chaos. We will no longer need nor desire excited misery. We need to learn to recognize when we are seeking out “excited misery.” Understand that we don’t have to make problems or get involved with others’ problems. Find creative ways to fill our need for drama. Get enjoyable jobs. But keep the excited misery out of our lives.
>When we’re involved with a problem, we know we’re alive. When the problem is solved, we may feel empty and void of feeling. Nothing to do. Being in crisis becomes a comfortable place, and it saves us from our humdrum existence.
>After we have detached and begun minding our own business and our lives finally become serene, some codependents still occasionally crave a little of the old excitement. We may at times find our new way of life boring. We are just used to so much turmoil and excitement that peace seems bland at first. We’ll get used to it. As we develop our lives, set our goals, and find things to do that interest us, peace will become comfortable—more comfortable than chaos. We will no longer need nor desire excited misery.
>For many of us, it feels safer to be alone or in relationships where we are “unemotionally involved” than it does to be emotionally vulnerable, close, and loving.
>It’s okay to feel afraid of closeness and love, but it’s also okay to allow ourselves to love and feel close to people. It’s okay to give and receive love. We can make good decisions about who to love and when to do that. It’s okay for us to be who we are around people. Take the risk of doing that. We can trust ourselves. We can go through the awkwardness and friction of initiating relationships. We can find people who are safe to trust. We can open up, become honest, and be who we are. We can even handle feeling hurt or rejected from time to time. We can love without losing ourselves or giving up our boundaries. We can love and think at the same time.
>We can ask ourselves, are we preventing closeness in our existing relationship? How are we doing that? Is it necessary? Why? Do we know someone we want to be close to—someone who would be safe to be close to? Why don’t we take steps to get close to that person? Would we like to initiate some new relationships? How could we do that? Are we needing and wanting more intimacy in our relationships but settling for less? Why?
>Sex isn’t love; it is sex. It doesn’t make love exist if the love wasn’t there to start with. Sex can only express the love that already exists.
>According to Earnie Larsen and others, the two deepest desires most people have are: to love and be loved, and to believe they are worthwhile and know someone else believes that also.
