---
title: Better Late Than Never by Lorraine Price
layout: post
date: '2020-07-23 16:40:41 -0600'
image: /images/posts/BetterLateThanNever.jpg
published: true
---
The therapeutic task is simply to be in tune with the client and their developmental needs, to acknowledge and validate, to be fully present within the relationship, and to offer some appropriate gratification.

As I have already mentioned in chapter one, clients who may benefit from allowing a therapeutic regression to a dependent relationship do vary in their presentation. The therapist may experience the client as having a deep yearning or hunger for relationship. Some clients fit the oral dependent picture, all are heavily defended, often with primitive defences, and are easily shamed. There may be difficulties in holding on to object constancy that is, being unable to conceive that people or objects are consistent, trustworthy and reliable especially when they are not present. This is a developmental skill, which is usually learned in infancy and results from having experiences which confirm the care- taker as reliable and trustworthy and the relationship as ongoing and sustainable.

Those practitioners using object relations theory to understand the experiences of their clients’ view that the troubling symptoms experi- enced by some of their clients have their roots in their early infantile relational experiences and the experiences of trauma which resulted.

Thompson identifies Ferenczi’s understanding of therapeutic repair “the patient is ill because he has not been loved, and that he needs from the analyst the positive experience of acceptance, i.e. love”.

Such transference can be seen in the following quotation from one of my research participants who is describing how important the therapist has become to her, and the significance of the relationship:
[...] I also couldn’t bear the idea of her having other clients [...] I just convinced myself I WAS the only one, and she only had the others because she’d got to earn a living, and that way I could just tolerate it. [...] 19-20


Lewis (2004) asserts that parents with their own unmet develop- mental needs can fail to help their infant to develop self-regulation. He describes dissonance being laid down in the cells, autonomic nervous system, and energy centres of the infant. He identifies this dissonance as the basis of falling anxiety and premature ego development which from a relational and developmental perspective could be formulated as a fear of letting go, and a split into thinking to avoid feeling. This has emerged in client work when the client experiences a desire to let go of control and “rest” with the therapist in order to experience dependence. When this emerges in therapy a fear of falling, or of being dropped, can be manifested. For me as a client this manifested as a fear that my therapist couldn’t “hold” me. Bion (1962, p. 116) posits that where the mother is an inadequate container for the child’s indigestible feelings he remains in a state of “nameless dread”. This could then be seen to lead to psychopathology, where it may remain to re-emerge in adulthood.
The argument that the ruptured strivings for human contact in infancy can be manifested in adulthood and in the therapeutic relation- ship is constructed by Hedges (1994b, pp. 5–6). He identifies this as the continued search for the lost mother of infancy, the empty place where the needed love and acceptance were never received, which has left “its own definite and indelible mark on personality”. This “living record of failed connection” leaves them searching for a relationship to fulfil the need and complete them, a stance taken by both Freud, (1905d) and Van Sweden (1995). This search for that lost mother of infancy then contin- ues into adult life and is the premise of this study. 24


The early development of the infant is described by Hedges (1994b) as the “organising experience”, referring to the process occurring within the infant within the first few months of life, maybe even in the womb. This description has also been used by Yorke (1986) and by Stolorow and Atwood (1992) to designate a state of psychological organisation. When the infant fails to organise mental activity because of the absence of a present and attuned mother, it organises around aspects of itself,
becoming aversive to contact with the primary nurturing object, that is, the infant fails to attach to a mother who is unavailable. This phenom- enon is referred to by Grotstein (1994) as an early massive dissociation of the personality, and he quotes a variety of other theorists describ- ing this period as “infantile catastrophe” (Bion, 1962, 1963), “failure to go on being” (Winnicott, 1952/1984), “annihilation anxiety” (Mahler, 1952, 1958, 1968, 1972) and “black hole anxiety” (Tustin, 1966, 1972) and (Grotstein, 1990). He also describes this as Balint’s “basic fault” (1968). Fosha (2003, pp. 227–228) recognises that fear constricts the range of tol- erance and exploration of emotion. In the absence of such “dyadically constructed safety”, energy will be devoted to defence mechanisms to enable the infant to psychologically survive. Adams (2006) identifies the primitive nature of the defences used by such clients. In her 2009 work she identifies how, in primitive ego states, terror of intimacy and the need for human contact in dichotomy can result in the experience of annihilation anxiety and dissociation.
The concept of the “false self” (Winnicott, 1965a/1984) can be seen as such a defence mechanism, where the vulnerable “true self”, because of the risk of annihilation, is split off, sequestered and protected by the “false self”. The “false self” hides the “true self” by complying with the environmental demands, and in extreme circumstances may com- pletely isolate the “true self”. Splitting is a complex subject, and as such I am limiting it in this book to my understanding of splitting which relates largely to Winnicott’s meaning, where spontaneous and creative aspects of self are split-off or isolated from the rest of the personality. This isolation of an aspect of self could also be seen as dissociation, a defence mechanism of primitive origin. 26-27



Attachment
In his 1988 work Bowlby described the applications of attachment the- ory developed during his previous writings (1969/1982, 1973, 1980). He propounded a model of the development of the attachment bond between infant and primary caregiver, seeing the infant leading the relationship, and the mother/caregiver sensitively responding. The mother’s response to the infant’s cues (her attunement) leads the infant to adapt either towards, or away from, cooperation with her. Those infants receiving attentive loving care will view themselves as loveable, developing secure attachment behaviours while those whose comfort- seeking behaviour is dismissed or rejected will see themselves as unlov- able and will develop insecure attachment behaviours.
From an attachment theory perspective chronic misattuned dyadic interactions can result in disorders of attachment. Attachment theory describes the nature of significant relationships between humans from their development in infancy through to later life (Bowlby, 1969) 28


Trauma can take the form of easily identifiable events, such as abuse or physical neglect, but also can involve repeated less discrete but more pervasive accumulations of misattunements which are traumatising to the young infant who does not have the psychological reserves with which to manage overwhelming and painful emotions. This is known by some theorists as cumulative trauma. The concept of cumulative trauma is identified by Khan (1963) as resulting from the lack of fit between child and parent, and as a specific traumatic childhood expe- rience based on continuous environmental failure (misattunements) from a caretaker in infancy (Lourie, 1996), leading to psychopathology. Fosha (2003, p. 226) also recognises the impact of cumulative trauma “the sequelae of trauma and neglect not only become evident in the dra- matic disturbances of PTSD, but also make themselves known and felt in the havoc wreaked on social relationships and the devastating ruin of a baseline of well-being”. Lourie (1996) sees the result of these fail- ures as having an impact on the child’s developing relationships into adulthood with both themselves and others. To manage these feelings requires the development of defences, initially to protect against the effects of further failures. She considers these defences from the per- spective of bodily armour which was donned in infancy and remains so into adulthood. 29

Empathically attuned care, which is ideal in the mother/infant relationship, can be supplied in the therapeutic relationship with dyadic affective processes of attunement, empathy and repair. She considers that “the processing of emotional experience solidifies, rather than taxes and erodes, the attachment bond”. 30

When the facilitating environment does not appropriately match the needs of the infant, the resulting psychic disturbance is described by Balint (1968, pp. 19–22) as “the basic fault”. He considers that this fault which develops in infancy can remain for the whole of a person’s life “it is a fault, something wrong in the mind, a kind of deficiency which must be put right. It is not something dammed up for which a better outlet must be found, but something missing”. His theory of “new beginnings” required the patient to be capable of regression, that is, a return to the area of the “basic fault” in order to re-emerge with the capacity for a mature object relationship. Winterson (2011, p. 145) iden- tifies that “the past is so hard to shift. It comes with us like a chaperone, standing between us and the newness of the present—the new chance”.
Winnicott conceptualised similar experiences in his 1974 paper enti- tled “Fear of breakdown” where he described the ego’s inability to encompass intense emotional experiences, a view with which Erskine (2007) concurs. Psychosis is seen as “the defensive organisation designed to protect the self” resulting from failures in the infant care process. He described the infant in a place of psychotic anxiety with feelings of annihilation, going to pieces, falling for ever, having no relation to the body, having no orientation in the world, and complete isolation without means of communication. In his view, these horrors surface in later life as psychotic or borderline-state anxieties in which one’s very being seems threatened. 30

Little (1990) described such experiences as resulting from pockets of psychosis which can be experienced in the regression to dependence process, as in her 1981 quotation from Santayana (1921) “the suppressed madness in a sane man”. When clients are in this phase they may be considered to be experiencing the terror and rage of early maternal failure, and the therapist’s task is to provide a holding environment to allow the experience and expression of these emotions. Winnicott describes “unthinkable” or “archaic” anxiety being aroused by trauma “against which an individual has no organised defence, so that a con- fusional state supervenes”. It can be experienced as annihilation, total destruction, falling forever, being isolated through having no means of communication, being unconnected to the body, or being lost in space (Winnicott, 1958b/1984, 1965b/1984). Integration can then be promoted in an environment where needs can be acknowledged, validated and appropriately met. He identified how the transference relationship becomes real for the client, “In so far as the patient is regressed (for a moment or for an hour, or over a long period of time) the couch is the analyst, the pillows are breasts, the analyst is the mother at a certain past era” so recognising this psychotic aspect of the regression (1984, p. 288). 31

It can also refer to the regression occurring as a result of the therapist’s facilitation in order to allow the client to connect with earlier developmental aspects of their experience for healing purposes (Clarkson, 2003). 33

“Regression is a flight backwards in search of security and a chance for a new start. But regression becomes an illness in the absence of any therapeutic person to regress with and to” (Guntrip, 1969, p. 86). 34

The object relations movement and the attachment theorists emphasise the infant/caretaker relationship where the infant is seen as appropriately dependent on the mother, but de-emphasise practi- cal oral activities seeing the actual relationship between mother and infant as a dependent one from an emotional perspective, and rather than physical deprivation of the breast emotional deprivation being the precursor of dependant personality traits. I would suggest that both biological dependency needs and emotional dependency needs have some correlation in the development of dependent personality traits and subsequently can become a factor in their repair. This work does not consider specifically or in detail those with dependent personality
traits, whereby help is sought from anyone who seems able to provide it, but rather addresses those dependency needs which are related to relationship and attachment, where the dependency is focused upon a particular individual for support, attention and reliability. Steele et al. (2001) note that dependency increases in insecure attachment relation- ships where there is trauma or neglect. So we can conclude from these relationship focus models that environmental failure in the normal developmental period where dependency is appropriate, results in a potentially life-long search, either consciously or unconsciously for that solid, reliable, transformative other who can bond with the individual and offer the potential for that individual to grow through dependency into the relational interdependency of adulthood. Steele et al. consider that Bornstein and Bowen (1995) clearly link dependency with attempts to develop a secure attachment relationship. In integrative psychother- apy the aim is to develop an inter-dependence whereby individuals are supported by trusted persons whose help they can access when in need.
The process of regression offers a chance to re-visit previous developmental stages and learn new ways of relating. The regression is not a regression back to something that was once there but became lost, but rather to a developmental epoch where something was needed but never existed. Bromberg (1991, pp. 416–417) recognises the need and the value of regression for some patients “[...] the deeper the regression that can be safely allowed by the patient, the richer the experience and the greater its reverberation on the total organization of the self.” 36-37

This concurs with Winnicott’s (1963a) thinking. These dependency needs, when revived in the therapeutic relationship, offer the oppor- tunity for a corrective experience and also an opportunity to under- stand them from an adult perspective, rather than helplessly as a child would.

This chapter has identified the importance of regression to depend- ence and how this can result in progression for the client. It is important to mention however that when the therapeutic relationship becomes “significant” the regressive processes which occur as a result of the transference can result in the re-experiencing of frightening feelings and their subsequent defences. This process is developed further in the chapter on Terror. 38

When the interaction between caregiver and infant is placed at the centre of developmental theory and the therapeutic relationship is formulated as a replication of the original infant/caregiver relation- ship because of its dyadic nature, and its intense focus on the client and hypnotic quality, then the potential for relational repair becomes possible. This repair can span a wide spectrum of therapeutic interven- tions, from the offering of a listening and non-judgmental space for a client to explore issues which are currently troubling, to a regression to, and re-experiencing of, traumatic events in early life. In a facilita- tive relationship these traumatic events can be identified, and a narra- tive of the client’s experience can emerge. Erskine (1998) views these aspects of experience as “a form of non-verbal early communication of those neglectful and traumatic experiences”. This view of the relational and communicative aspects of regression echoes Balint’s (1968) view. Bromberg (1991, p. 416) considered that: “Therapeutic regression refers to the raw states of cognitive disequilibrium allowed by an analytic patient as part of the progressive self-perpetuating restructuring of the self and object representations.” 39



Bradshaw (1988) considers that when the child’s parents are shame-based they are only able to focus on their own need and, therefore, are unable to address the child’s need when it clashes with the parent’s need. The child grows up and develops, but underneath still remains the neglected child with “a hole in the soul” (Tomkins, 1962, 1963), which is unable to be filled within adult to adult relationships, because it is the needs of the archaic infant, present in the adult, which are yearned for. 43


Because of the central role played by shame in social and self develop- ment, when it becomes a state of being, taking over the whole identity, it can result in the development of feelings of inadequacy and worth- lessness resulting in poor functioning and emotional distress, feelings of isolation because of difficulty in relating to others, and ultimately lead to psychopathology (Lewis, 1971), affecting the ability to trust oneself and one’s own judgement, feelings, needs or desires. When an infant has experienced non-acceptance of itself frequently and over a relatively long period of time, the experience of shame is internalised and the self and all the expressions of that self feel shameful. 44

There is general agreement that shame follows some kind of expo- sure which reveals a vulnerable side of self. Wurmser (1987) summa- rises what we are most ashamed of, the main points being; I am weak and a failure; I am dirty, messy and disgusting; I am defective, physi- cally or mentally. All of these views contribute to the sense of being wrong and feeling wrong. This non-acceptance, which begins as an external experience, becomes internalised as part of the self.
The connection between being seen and shame is made by Wright (1991) who also acknowledges that shame can occur in isolation when both aspects of self and other are intrapsychically experienced. He quotes from Lynd (1958) that “shame forces into awareness some aspect of one’s self that one had not realised”. Clients often experience buried needs and thus feel shame as they come into awareness during therapy, but ultimately the experience of shame can increase self-awareness and understanding of one’s own needs and identity. He argues that shame begins in the experience of being seen by the other and the realisation that the other can see things about us that we may not be aware of. The experience of shame, then, occurs when one’s awareness of one’s self shifts from the embodied experience to a perceived objective view of one’s self. He also quotes from Sartre (1957) writing about the threat of the other, and the other’s objectively defining of the self. Wright sees that the threat of attack by the other is a threat to annihilate the subjec- tive self, by becoming an object of the other in their subjective world. 45

Infants are dependent upon their caretakers for their needs to be met. When needs for dependency, physical contact, mirroring, empathy, and any other need have been neglected by the caretaker these needs themselves can become a source of shame, for example, where physical contact has been experienced as shameful in childhood the individual in adult life is shamed both by physical contact itself and the need for it. This is demonstrated in the words of a research participant, who recognises that shame issues around touch link back to issues around touch with his mother: I think it stirred up intense shame issues for me, which go right back to my early childhood, and I think ... rejection to do with touch with my own mother [...] and issues that [...] clearly got caught up with it all [...] 46-47

“When there has been a lack of attunement, acknowledgement, or validation of needs or feelings within the family or school system, the client may have no language of relationship with which to communicate about his or her affects and needs” (Basch, 1985; Tustin, 1986).
Relational shame is of significance when working with regression to dependence because as clients regress within the therapeutic rela- tionship they re-experience their vulnerability and dependence on the other. They will therefore experience the shame that is within, finding their needs and vulnerabilities shameful and expecting, in the transfer- ence relationship, that the therapist will also find them shameful. 48


The experience of shame in a shame prone person can feel very natural and therefore is not identified as an issue in its own right. A person experiencing shame may find speech and articulation difficult when viewing shame through a developmental lens because of its developmental positioning in early infancy. Because of the development of shame in early infancy shame feelings are often not in verbal awareness, existing only on a feeling and embodied level. The anguish of shame and the defences of despair and paranoia can lead to the loss of an aspect of the self which is needed for intimacy. This can result in feelings of emptiness and may be presented at assess- ment by the client even though the external features of their life appear to be fulfilling. 49


Josselson (1992) considers that the extreme of shame is the experience of annihilation, if “I” am not seen, “I” cease to exist, and fragmentation occurs. Seeing acceptance in the eyes of others is essential to the devel- opment of a healthy self. When shame is understood and acknowledged by the therapist it can allow the client to work through their experience and develop a reparative relationship which allows the client to start to develop an identity which is not shame bound and “wrong”.
Even when the therapist is accepting and non-shaming, archaic shame does not just disappear, and can impact the work at any point. From my own experience, both personally and professionally, even when the shame process is identified sufficiently well to enable the cli- ent to allow regressive needs to surface, shame is still present within the work and can surface with renewed vigour when there has been a break in the relationship for holidays or illness, and also when the client is about to make a new leap forward in the development of the relation- ship, that is, when the client is about to risk exposure of self, or of needs of the self, by identifying them to the therapist, shame can emerge, preventing such exposure and resulting in the client remaining silent. One of my research participants recognised another aspect of shame as it emerges in the regression to dependence process. 50

 Tompkins et al. (2005, p. 2) recognise that “clients will often switch to metaphor whenever they need to [...] talk about something obliquely”. They recognise that some experiences are too difficult to talk about in other ways. Clark (1993) describes how initially the client has the belief that the therapist sees some aspect of them as shameful, so using meta- phor enables the client to test out the therapist’s responses to the issue before owning it, so lessening the risk of shame. The field of play ther- apy recognises the developmental processes that children transition. Working with symbolisation allows children to tell their story. This initially symbolic story becomes languaged through the therapy, and then will begin to take over from symbols. Using metaphor engages with this developmental process and the symbolic emerges to become language which can then be shared and worked through with the therapist. 54

  Adams (2009, p. 132) notes that cli- ents “oscillate between feeling just fine, and then inexplicably falling apart.” 58


 I would say they all had a developmental need [...] it was a rela- tional need and a safe containment. All of them have not had physi- cal holding, or safe physical holding as children [...] and I feel that they have reached the point of utter despair [...] not necessarily suicidality, but that feeling that they are just going to completely collapse [...] or not being able to cope at all [...] for the client I think they need to know that I’m gonna be there consistently [...] and
because of their own fear of collapse they need to somehow trust me sufficiently to hold them, psychologically [...] I think if they are afraid of falling apart they need to know that somebody will stop that happening [...].
[when] clients come into therapy they may well be in a regressed state, so [...] they’ve got limited kind of resources, or something has pushed them back into a place [...] that’s familiar, but they can’t escape from.
61-62

Clients who have apparently experienced early mishandling or other misattunement may present for therapy with a desperate need for rela- tionship yet have a real fear of it, and they may fear touch and inti- macy generally. 63

Both personally and professionally, I consider touch and sometimes physical holding to be necessary and advisable to provide that sense of physicality and regulation which has been missing for these clients. In identifying that clients are in touch with more inchoate states then those means of contact which are appropriate to early infancy are useful to establish contact. Communication with infants is largely non-verbal so interventions of touch and holding are key. 89

Ellman (2007) identifies that as love develops in the therapeutic rela- tionship the ruptures occurring as a result of transference are more easily recovered from, and the survival of these ruptures enhances the trust between the therapeutic couple. Such an experience of love begins to fill the empty spaces in the client’s psyche, helping them to know that they are no longer alone at their core of their being. 106



I have stated earlier, that in formulating inchoate feelings as needs, a narrative is established which helps both therapist and client to have a sense of the direction of the work, a kind of map of shared understand- ing. However, just as in the mother/infant relationship, until the child achieves the ability to verbalise their needs, wants and desires, there is a necessity to tolerate ambiguity and live with not knowing which is echoed in the therapeutic dyad. Stewart (2003) considered that work on this area of analysis has not received the recognition it deserves because of the adaptation of technique that it requires, and the necessity of the therapist living in the difficult position of not knowing for long peri- ods. But this is the nature of this work, and, in order to have an effec- tive outcome, offering the possibility of a ‘new beginning’ to the client, the therapist’s adaptation is required. This adjusted stance is described beautifully by my research participant:
[...] the key times, the critical moments were definitely those points of regression, it wasn’t the regression itself, it was the moving through the regression, there was something about being met, and feeling safe enough in my own therapy [...] once things became unlocked they tumbled out, I couldn’t stop them, I couldn’t put the lid back on, and part of me didn’t want to, I didn’t know where it was going, I didn’t know sometimes if I’d ever get better, if I’d ever feel normal, or the sense of normality I thought I’d had before, which I realise wasn’t really normality at all, but I kind of knew I needed it out, so I think I trusted that process somewhere, even though I was often scared [...] She held me, she stroked me, she sang to me, she covered me up with a duvet, she stroked my hair, she read me stories, we played in the sand, we drew and painted, you know, finger painting, foot painting, we did all kinds of things that were beyond my life experience that needed to happen for me to be able to inhabit another (name) who’d never had a voice, never had a place, never had any form of expression, and all that was really moving work, the painting, really moving work, and very beautiful, and she handled the time boundaries brilliantly. 107



This participant is describing an experience in her own therapy, which illustrates the importance and nature of the therapeutic relationship to her. She has arrived for her therapy whilst the previous client is still leaving:
[...] as I walked in the hallway the door opened and my therapist hugged the client and was really tender towards her, and, and the client left, and I was devastated by her, absolutely devastated that, they’d become like my parents that didn’t notice that I’d really needed her to be there and be waiting for me and notice, and she really wasn’t there and she really didn’t notice me, and, and she said that she’d even forgot that I was coming, and that, that part of the therapy has been really difficult for me, being forgotten, not being noticed, makes me rage as to why it’s still happening, how I can be so forgotten and so unimportant. [...] 120

 When working with the regressed ego therapeutic misattunements can cause the client to experi- ence deep shame and pain, the effect of which should not be minimised (Clark, 1993; Simon & Geib, 1996), but as in all therapy these misattune- ments can be successfully used to deepen the relationship, and, with successful reparation can allow the client to feel loved. The therapist’s occasional and unintentional failure for the client can actually help the client to recognise the normal failures which are a part of life, and to become robust and resilient. In the dependency stage of early infant development the caregiver does not know what the infant’s needs are, but makes an educated guess of what might be needed. When this is wrong then the infant protests and the caregiver learns more about the

  A client that I was holding [...] there was nothing, no words going on, but I had a sense that his head was really tender, like a new- born, like how you would protect a new-born baby’s head, and I put my hand on the top of his head, on the crown of his head, and something really changed in his body, his body went in that, and there was something really met in that, and he did, he was able to tell me a few sessions after that that had been really powerful. 124

 This definition places the therapeutic relationship as the most important agent of the therapeutic process”, a concept identified by Norcross & Prochaska (1986). 125


Clients who need to re-visit early developmental epochs will need to develop a long period of secure attachment with their therapist in order to create a safe, secure base in which to explore these painful experi- ences. In this process the infantile relational needs are believed to re- emerge and the developmental relational stance will require some gratification of these needs (Van Sweden, 1995).
Siegel (2003) describes psychotherapy as a form of attachment rela- tionship in which the client seeks proximity, is soothed, and develops an internal working model of security based on the experience and sub- sequent learning of the nature of the relationship between the thera- pist and client, seeing that an effective change in brain function and in the attachment process can help the client to self-regulate. Stewart (2011) describes the possibility of developing a secure attachment after a successful long-term therapeutic relationship. Some attachment theo- rists (Roisman et al., 2002; Phelps, Belskg, & Cmic, 1998) have called this “earned secure” which describes the attachment relationships of adults who have had early traumatic relationships, but have created a narrative for their experience and have entered into a reparative rela- tionship. The development of attachment, the understanding of object relational needs, working within transference whereby early relation- ships are reprised within the therapeutic relationship where the client can experience a new relationship and risk regression and depend- ency with a dependable other. Ultimately it is possible for previously held disorganised, insecure attachments to move towards more secure attachment relationships as a result of the therapeutic relationship. My participants have identified that this attentive, loving care, when provided within the therapeutic relationship through adaptation of technique, allows clients to rediscover themselves as worthy and love- able, and to develop secure attachment patterns. 132

 Book finished. Amazing book. Huge Great list of references at end of book
